Title: 2604.11343v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11343v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 02:07:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
1

Published version : Sajad Ashouri, Arash Hajikhani, Ari Hyytinen, Petri Rouvinen, Arho Suominen, 

Which discoveries are paradigm shifting?, Industrial and Corporate Change, 2026;, dtag002, 

https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtag002 

# Which Discoveries Are Paradigm Shiftin g? 

Sajad Ashouri 1,2 (sajad.ashouri@vtt.fi ), Arash Hajikhani 1 (arash.hajikhani@vtt.fi ), Ari Hyytinen 3 *

> (ari.hyytinen@hanken.fi )

, Petri Rouvinen 4 (petri.rouvinen@etla.fi ), Arho Suominen 1,2 (arho.suominen@vtt.fi )

1: VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland (Tekniikantie 21, 02150 Espoo )

2: Industrial Engineering & Management, Tampere University, Finland (Kalevantie 4, 33100 Tampere )

3: Hanken School of Economics , Finland (Arkadiankatu 22, 00100 Helsinki ), and 

Helsinki GSE, Finland (Arkadiankatu 7, 00100 Helsinki )

4: ETLA Economic Research, Finland (Arkadiankatu 23, 00100 Helsinki )

* Corresponding author : Ari Hyytinen. 

Abstract : To better align theories of paradigm shifting discoveries and empirics identifying them, we 

propose a novel measure that incorporates a discovery’s impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the 

past into a single, coherent measure. Calibration using the National Inventor Hall of Fame data reveals 

that impact, novelty, and disruptiveness are strict complements meaning, for example, that greater im-

pact cannot substitute for moderate novelty. We illustrate the workings of the measure using data on 

USPTO pate nts from 1982 to 2015 .

JEL codes : O31, O33, O34 

Acknowledgements : We thank Giacomo Calzolari, Vincenzo Denicolò, Russell Funk, Tuomas 

Takalo, Otto Toivanen, Roope Uusitalo and seminar participants at MaCCI Annual Conference 2024 

and the Annual Meeting of the Finnish Economic Association 2024 for useful discussions. On his part, 

Hyytinen thanks Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation, FORTE (grant no. 2021 -01552_3), Saara and Björn Wahl-

roos’ foundation and dr. h.c. Marcus Wallenberg’s Foundation for Research in Business Administration 

for financial support. Key parts of this research were completed while Hyytinen was visiting University 

of Bologna, Italy. 2

1. INTRODUCTION 

Researchers stand on the shoulders of giants, but what determines on whose shoulders we stand in a 

particular endeavor? When research advances incrementally, it can be conceptualized as a continuous 

process that recombines existing knowledge (Bresnahan, 2012; Fleming & Sorenson, 2001; Weitzman, 

1998) and that enables research trajectories that are cumulative, integrative, and path dependent 

(Augsdorfer, 2005; Patel & Pavitt, 1997) . This progress corresponds to ‘normal science’ (Kuhn, 1962; 

see also Leahey et al., 2023) , leading often to piecemeal scientific and technological progress . Yet, dis-

coveries can also be disruptive (e.g., Christensen, 1997; Christensen et al., 2002; Felin & Kauffman, 

2023; Hopster, 2021; Schmidt & Druehl, 2008) , leading to discontinuities, to restructuring of existing 

organizations and markets (Adner, 2002; Arthur, 2007, 2009; Christensen et al., 2018; Christensen et 

al., 2015; O’Connor & Veryzer, 2001) , and to abrupt changes in the evolution of sociotechnical systems 

(e.g., Kivimaa et al., 2021; Wilson & Tyfield, 2018) . Such p aradigm shifting discoveries are rare (Dosi, 

1982; Kuhn, 1962; Wuestman et al., 2020) , but when they happen, they tend to break with the past, thus 

altering the shoulders on which subsequent research is built. The contribution of this study is that we 

propose a novel measure that simultaneously captures three salient dimensions of such paradigm shift 

discoveries, i.e., their tendency (i) to have a significant impact on subsequent inquiry, (ii) to be novel in 

how they use prior knowledge, and (iii) to break with the past (i.e., to render some previous discoveries 

obsolete). 

Several scholars have contributed to the recent debates on the nature of scientific and technolog-

ical advance and on the tendency of discoveries to break with the past. 1 In their seminal contribution, 

Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) introduced the Consolidation -Disruption index (the CD index) to capture 

discontinuities in the trajectory of technological development. Their key insight is that when a disruptive 

technology provides a platform for future discoveries, it changes how future discoveries cite previous 

ones. Wu et al. (2019) apply this measure to patent and publication data, arguing that the measure iden-

tifies successfully both disruptive inventions and scholarly writings. Recently, Park et al. (2023) applied   

> 1The literature refers to exceptional and unusually significant innovations using various labels, such as “radical”
> (Capponi et al., 2022; Coccia, 2017; Dosi, 1982) , and “breakthrough” (Barnholt, 1997; Mascitelli, 2000) .

3

the CD index to explore whether research articles and patents have become less likely to break with the 

past (see also Macher et al., 2024) . In addition, there are several studies that have used the CD index to 

examine the tendency of discoveries to break with the past using field or sector specific data; for a 

review, see Leibel and Bornmann (2023) . Yet, despite its importance for the theories of scientific and 

technological change and its practical relevance for, e.g., managerial decisions and corporate strategies, 

measuring the nature of this progress, especially its disruptive ness , is still subject to considerable debate 

(Funk & Owen -Smith, 2017; Leahey et al., 2023) and lacks consensus (Bornmann et al., 2020; Leibel 

& Bornmann, 2023; Nagy et al., 2016) .2 Leibel and Bornmann (2023) discuss in detail the ongoing 

controversies in how to measure disruptiveness using citation s data. An example of an alternative ap-

proach to the citation -based measures is Kelly et al. (2021) , who utilize textual analysis of patent docu-

ments to deduce indicators of patent quality and innovation. 

Inspired by the seminal contribution of Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) and by the recent work of 

Leahey et al. (2023) , our aim is to better align theoretical work on abrupt scientific and technological 

advancements, manifesting themselves as paradigm shifting discoveries (Kuhn, 1962; Wuestman et al., 

2020) , and empirical work aiming to identify and to quantify them. Whereas some fundamental para-

digm shifting discoveries may change how human beings understand the world (e.g., Copernican revo-

lution that led to heliocentrism), we seek to quantify paradigm shifts in their narrower meaning, i.e., 

when they concern a broadly defined scientific discipline or technological field. While narrower, such 

paradigm shifts create new types of external economies and spillovers, reshaping thus both firms’ inter-

nal R&D projects and collaborative and competitive interaction between firms within broader industrial 

contexts, as discussed by Sturgeon (2002) . Building on the views put forward by, e.g. , Leibel and 

Bornmann (2023) and Leahey et al. (2023) , w e argue that existing (mostly unidimensional) measures 

cannot successfully capture the tendency of such paradigm shifting discoveries (i) to be highly cited , (ii) 

to be novel, and (iii) to render some of the previous discoveries obsolete . To wit, citation counts mirror 

the strength of a discovery’s impact, but not its nature. On the other hand, the widely -used CD index of    

> 2Echoing this, Park et al. (2023, p. 143) note that the CD index “will benefit from future work on its behaviour
> and properties”.

4

Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) and its subsequent modifications (e.g., Bornmann et al., 2020; 

Leydesdorff et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023) aim at measuring whether a discovery 

alters how preceding findings and technologies are cited. These measures do not capture a discovery’s 

impact, since a patent or a research paper can obtain a high CD index value and may still receive only a 

small number of forward citations . This suggest s that it has barely been noticed by the relevant commu-

nity and is unlikely to redirect the course of scientific and technological advance (Bu et al., 2021; Funk 

& Owen -Smith, 2017; Leibel & Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) . Finally, theories of scientific change 

suggest that a primary reason why discoveries tend to break with the past is their greater novelty, since 

such findings are associated with uniquely creativ e ideas and tend to draw attention away from past 

efforts (Foster et al., 2015; Leahey et al., 2023; Lee & Min, 2015; Leibel & Bornmann, 2023; Sheng et 

al., 2023; Uzzi et al., 2013) .

This paper builds on the insight that to empirically single out paradigm shifting discoveries , we 

need a single, coherent measure that incorporate s their three identifying dimensions , i.e., their impact, 

novelty , and tendency to break with the past (Kuhn, 1962; Wuestman et al., 2020) . We propose that, 

when calculated over the se three identifying dimensions, the well -known mathematical concept of gen-

eralized mean (e.g., Bullen, 2003) leads in to such a measure. While the generalized mean has been used 

in applied work earlier (for applications and outcomes, see, e.g., Ahmadpoor & Jones, 2019; Haley, 

2019; Perry & Reny, 2016) , our application of it is novel . A further novelty is that we normalize the 

dimensions over which the generalized mean is calculated using the percentages of their respective cu-

mulative distributions (Bornmann et al., 2020; Leydesdorff et al., 2021; Park et al., 2023) . Importantly, 

this normalization means that the complete distribution of each variable is considered (Bornmann & 

Williams, 2020) , enabling researchers to rank patents or publications relative to their comparators in 

terms of their impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the past. 

As we demonstrate, the proposed measure has several strengths. First, it allows ran king discov-

eries across the three identifying dimensions and then compresses them into a single, easy -to -understand ,

quantitative measure that varies on a well -defined interval from zero to one. Similarly to the graph theory 

-based approach of Gebhart and Funk (2023) , this nested approach considers simultaneously the number 

of citations, their novelty, and their interconnectedness. This is a desirable property, because empirically 5

the identifying dimensions are only moderately (if at all) correlated and thus contain independent infor-

mation. Second, because of its flexible parametrization, the measure does not restrict a priori whether 

discoveries’ impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the past are complements or substitutes. To 

infer what the appropriate parametrization is, one can use either theoretical arguments (i.e., 

axiomatically, as in Perry & Reny, 2016) or empirical analysis (as in Ahmadpoor & Jones, 2019) , de-

pending on the goal of the study. In our application we opt for using both. Specifically, w e calibrate the 

proposed measure us ing data on USPTO patents and significant discoveries made by the inventors listed 

in the National Inventor Hall of Fame (NIHF) . The patents recognized by NIHF can be interpreted to 

represent paradigm shifting discoveries because they have laid an acknowledged foundation for new 

discoveries or revolutionized existing ones. Our calibration reveals that the three dimensions (impact, 

novelty, disruptiveness) are str ict complements , which suggest s, e.g., that a greater tendency of a dis-

covery to break with the pas t cannot compensate for its weak impac t in determining whether it is para-

digm shifting. The calibrated measure can be used to predict paradigm shifting discoveries in unseen 

data (not used in calibration). Finally, the measure can be further extended to, e.g., to include yet other 

dimensions of paradigm shifting discoveries , implying that it can be tailored and re -calibrated to new 

research contexts in a transparent way. Because of these properties, we consider the proposed measure 

flexible and call it 𝐷 !"#$ for brevity. 

There are two further motivat ions to use 𝐷 !"#$ when identifying unusually significant discover-

ies . On one hand, applications of the existing disruption measures (e.g., the CD index and its modifica-

tions ) seem to implicitly assume that they also capture something greater than just discoveries’ tendency 

to break with the past in a technical sense, such as their capacity to revolutionize certain fields of science 

or technology. The literature seems to contain only a limited number of suggestions of how such capacity 

could be captured . One suggested solution is t he citation -weighted CD index (the mCD index) of Funk 

and Owen -Smith (2017) , which is obtained by multiplying a discovery’s CD index by its citation count. 

However, this measure is sensitive to variation in the citation counts due to the different scale of the CD 6

index and the citation count (Leibel & Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) .3 The proposed 𝐷 !"#$ neither 

suffer s from the scale issue nor require s using separate cut -offs. 4 Moreover, contrary to the existing 

measures , our application of 𝐷 !"#$ would detect that the USPTO patent on polymerase chain reaction ,

protecting a founding invention in modern biotechnology , is unique in terms of impact and disruptive-

ness but is not as novel. On the other hand, 𝐷 !"#$ improves upon exiting measures, because it naturally 

draws attention to how rare paradigm shifting discoveries are , i.e., to them being fundamentally a tail 

phenomenon (e.g., Fleming, 2007; Kaplan & Vakili, 2015; Kelly et al., 2021; Kuhn, 1962) . Specifically, 

paradigm shifting inventions should be sufficiently unique when compared to others in terms of their 

impact, novelty, and disruptiveness and also less commonly observed than their slightly less unique 

counterparts. This property does not ap ply to the CD index and its recent modifications , because its 

empirical distribution tends to have a concentrat ion at the right tail (see Bornmann et al., 2020; Holst et 

al., 2024) . Possible measurement issues aside (Holst et al., 2024) , it is not theoretically plausible that 

there would be many times more truly disruptive research findings (obtaining the maximum value of the 

measure) than findings that are only slightly less so (obtaining a value just below the maximum). Being 

multidimensional, t he proposed 𝐷 !"#$ allows for a more fine -tuned analysis of the discover ies that oth-

erwise would tend to cluster implausibly based on the existing measures. 

We apply the 𝐷 !"#$ measure to the USPTO patent data from 1982 to 2015 and to discoveries 

made by the inventors listed in the NIHF . Our estimations show that when considering which discoveries 

are likely to be paradigm shifting, their impact, novelty , and tendency to break with the past are str ictly 

complement ary. This property means, for example, that a discovery’s great impact cannot compensate 

for its moderate novelty or disruptiveness. This illustrates concretely the gain of putting the three 

measures together as opposed to using them in isolation; we find in our empirical application that it is                     

> 3The difference in the scale of the two components of the citation -weighted CD index means that highly cited
> discoveries with CD index values relatively close to zero may , counterintuitively, end up appearing extremely
> disruptive (or consolidating) in light of the mCD index .As a remedy, Wei et al. (2023) propose keeping the CD
> index and citation counts separate and using multiple cutoff values to determine which discoveries are consistent
> with revolutionary science .
> 4The proposed normalization suing the percentages of the respective cumulative distributions removes this prob-
> lem . In fact, we can show that are scaled version of the mCD index that can be obtained as a special limit case of
> 𝐷 !"#$ . This rescaled version can be applied to data without using multiple hard -to -define cut -off values, such as
> those used in Wei et al. (2023) .

7

the weakest of the three dimensions that determines the tendency of a discovery to be paradigm shifting. 

In additional analyses, t he measure predicts significant patents, as captured by their long -term citation 

counts . 𝐷 !"#$ also provides further insights of a selection of patented inventions that have been consid-

ered significant and disruptive in previous literature. Finally, we illustrate how 𝐷 !"#$ can be used by 

applying it to USPTO data from 1982 to 2015 .

The rest of this article is as follows: In Section 2, we outline a conceptual framework for our 

analysis. In Section 3, we review earlier literature on the measurement of discoveries’ disruptiveness 

and then introduce a new, multidimensional measure for identifying paradigm shifting discoveries. In 

section 4, we turn to empirical analysis, using the USPTO pate nt data from 198 2 to 2015. Therein, we 

illustrate some of the challenges with existing disruptiveness measures, how the new measure can be 

parametrize d, and provide examples of how it works. Section 5 discusses, and Section 6 concludes. 

2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 

2.1. Scientific revolutions and paradigm shifting discoveries 

As seminal works by Kuhn (1962) , Laudan (1978) , and Whitley (2000) suggest, revolutionary or 

paradigm shifting discoveries tend (i) to have a major impact on subsequent inquiry , (ii) to be novel in 

how they use and combine prior knowledge, and (iii) to render previous knowledge obsolete and to 

break with past trajectories. Such discoveries change the underlying assumptions, concepts , explana-

tions, and interpretations within a scientific discipline, leading to a new and more comprehensive un-

derstanding of the central phenomen a that the discipline purports to explain . By do ing so the se discov-

eries redirect and interrupt the normal course of scientific and draw attention away from the past research 

while influencing subsequent research efforts (Funk & Owen -Smith, 2017; Leahey et al., 2023; Leibel 

& Bornmann, 2023; Sheng et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023) . These views suggest that , rather than focusing 

on disruptiveness alone, scientific revolutions need to be scrutinized as paradigm shift s, i.e., as some-

thing that serve as a basis for (ample) subsequent efforts, involve a sufficient degree of originality and 

creativity (novelty), and bring about discontinuity .

At the time of Kuhn’s (1962) contribution and also during subsequent decades, science and tech-

nology were seen as much less overlapping than what they are considered today. Dosi (1982) broadened 

Kuhn’s (1962) notion of paradigm shifts in science to technological change, noting that “ Technological 8

paradigms and trajectories are in some respects metaphors of the interplay between continuity and 

ruptures in the process of incorporation of knowledge and technology into industrial growth …” (p. 

161). 5 While Dosi seems to emphasize a bit more the continuous nature of technological advance, his 

thinking is in line with Kuhn’s, to whom Dosi draws direct parallels in his characterization of techno-

logical paradigms and trajectories. While we do not yet “ fully understand what technological paradigms 

are ” (von Tunzelmann et al., 2008, p. 481; see also Nelson, 2008) , broadly speaking they are overarch-

ing frameworks guiding research and development efforts and technological inquiries. D iscontinuit ies 

and shifts in the se frameworks arguably originate from discoveries that tend to be technologically unique 

and significant in how they change those efforts and inquiries . Yaqub (2017) explores how technological 

paradigms shape technological trajectories and the impact of significant discoveries on the evolution of 

industries, using the examples of vaccines and HIV vaccines. This work highlights the importance of 

understanding how paradi gm shifting discoveries can alter the course of technological progress within 

specific industrial contexts. 

Whereas it may be tempting to equate paradigm shifting discoveries with fundamental changes 

in how human beings view and understand the world, such as the Copernican revolution that resulted in 

a shift towards heliocentrism or discoveries of Newtonian mechanics and quantum mechanics, we seek 

to quantify discoveries that are paradigm shifting in a somewhat narrower sense. We focus on paradigm 

shift s induced by single inventions or discoveries , as opposed to a cluster of related discoveries , within 

a given broadly defined scientific discipline or technological field. Such field -specific discover ies chal-

leng e and poten tially replace the prevailing scientific consensus on a major topic, forcing researchers 

and developers of the field to re -evaluate existing theories , develop new explanations and rethink the 

types of questions they need to study . The se kinds of discoveries do not just add new information but 

potentially disrupt existing knowledge by offering alternative explanations that require researchers to 

re -evaluate the prevailing consensus in the field in question and perhaps beyond it. Sturgeon (2002) 

highlights how measuring the impact and novelty of discoveries within their broader industrial context        

> 5The lasting legacy of Dosi’s (1982) seminal contribution is discussed at length by von Tunzelmann et al. (2008)
> in an introduction to a special issue and in its articles (in particular, see Nelson, 2008) .

9

has become increasingly important, reflecting the growing role of inter -firm interactions and external 

economies in driving innovation. 

We argue, moreover, that be they scientific or technological, paradigm shifting discoveries are 

fundamentally a tail phenomen on (Kelly et al., 2021; Kuhn, 1962; Wuestman et al., 2020) . This suggests 

that we should consider explicitly how a discovery, such as a patented invention, ranks relative to other s;

paradigm shifting discoveries are likely to be unique when compared to current and former findings 

within broadly defined scientific disciplines and technological fields (Dahlin & Behrens, 2005) . Because 

a paradigm shifting discovery is likely to be dissimilar in the considered dimensions when compared to 

other s, observing them ought to be a very infrequent ( low frequency ) occurrence. Therefore, irrespective 

of the specifics of the measure, it is natural to focus on the tail (s) of its distribution (Kelly et al., 2021) 

when considering which discoveries are paradigm shifting. 

2.2. Multidimensionality of paradigm shifting discoveries 

Discoveries and innovations are heterogenous and vary in their degree of complexity and structure 

(Dahlin & Behrens, 2005; Fleming, 2007; Higham et al., 2021; Scherer & Harhoff, 2000) , suggest ing 

that the capacity of a discovery to be paradigm shifting is multi dimensional . Leahey et al. (2023) simi-

larly argue that unidimensional measures are unable to holistically capture factors associated with nov-

elty and disruption (see also Bu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) . A key argument of this paper is that we 

ought to focus on the combined ability of impact, novelty, and disruptiveness to encapsulate empirically 

paradigm shifting discoveries. 

Wh ereas it has been acknowledge d that impact, novelty, and disruptiveness can be interviewed 

and partly overlapping (Leahey et al., 2023; Strumsky & Lobo, 2015; Verhoeven et al., 2016) , the y are 

distinct concepts. Reflecting this, their meaning, measurement, utility, and interpretations have been 

discussed in a somewhat disconnected fashion in the literature. For simplicity, w e also treat them sepa-

rate ly and address each concept in turn: 

Impact : Impact refers to the scale of influence a research outcome has on subsequent inquiry. 

Measuring such an impact is a multifaceted endeavor. One methodology for gauging impact is to scru-

tinize citations that research articles or patents receive. In our context, the number of forward citations 

that a patent obtains is the most apparent ex -post way of identifying a discovery’s impact. Patents with 10 

many forward citations are, by a standard revealed preference argument, important for future inventions: 

the higher the number of forward citations, the more important the patented invention is for subsequent 

inquiry (Hall et al., 2001; Harhoff et al., 1999) . Moreover, the sooner a patent accumulates a significant 

number of citations, the more impactful it is. Forward citations also reflect inventions’ private and social 

value (Bloom et al., 2013; Harhoff et al., 2003; Kline et al., 2019; Kogan et al., 2017) . What citations 

cannot fully capture is that an impactful outcome may also have implications beyond the sphere of 

research. It may, e.g., shift business practices, change competition in the marketplace, or lead to regula-

tory changes (Bornmann, 2012, 2016; Brueton et al., 2014; Searles et al., 2016) .6

Novelty : Novelty refers to the quality of being original or unprecedented. It denotes previously 

unexplored or undocumented ideas or new combinations of old ideas. Novelty is a necessary condition 

for humankind’s collective advance of knowledge. In practice, meas uring novelty involves comparing 

an idea to the body of existing knowledge. What differs from what is already established, is considered 

novel. In line with this view, a n unprecedented combination of technological areas spanned by a patent 

has been associa ted with novelty (Strumsky & Lobo, 2015; Verhoeven et al., 2016) . This view builds 

on the premise that an invention introducing new types of co -occurrences of distinct areas tends to be a 

novel recombination of existing knowledge (e.g., Weitzman, 1998) .

Strumsky and Lobo (2015) argue that a patent ’s novelty can be inferred from the technological 

classification of patents. In this view, the novelty of a patent has three levels – origination, combination, 

and refinement. Origination implies the highest degree of novelty, since it means that an innovation is 

so novel that a new technological area (appearing in the patent) needs to be introduced for it. The next 

level, combination, occurs when a novel pairwise combination of technological areas is observed in the 

patent. Finally, if a patent does not include any novel combinations of technological areas , it is incre-

mental innovation; such patents are refinements. Echoing this line of thinking, Verhoeven et al. (2016)           

> 6Kelly et al. (2021) provide a specific operational definition of impact in the domain of patenting. They ascertain
> impact by analyzing a patent’s sway over forthcoming inventions . This is quantified by examining a paten t’s “for-
> ward similarity” to all patents lodged within the ensuing five -year timeframe. A heightened forward similarity
> denotes a pronounced effect of the patent on subsequent inquiry .Park et al. (2023) employ a similar metric. In
> their approach, impact is gauged by examining how closely a given patent aligns with subsequent patents registered
> within a five -year period. A surging forward similarity suggests that the patent in question was not just a product
> of its time b ut also a catalyst for shaping future inventions .

11 

consider the degree to which a patent includes new combinations of fields in its non -patent references. 

The more unprecedented combinations there are , the more novel the patent .

Patent documents’ textual data is yet another sour ce for inferring novelty (Arts et al., 2021; Bloom 

et al., 2021; Kaplan & Vakili, 2015; Kelly et al., 2021) . For example, Arts et al. (2021) examine patents’ 

title, abstract, and claims to identify novelty, as indicated by new technical keywords, bigrams, and 

trigrams. A large number of new keyword combinations relative to the other patents issued in the same 

technology class is indicative of the focal patent being novel. This kind of keyword analysis allows 

capturing novelty in a more flexible fashion than an analysis of predefined and administratively deter-

mined technological fields or classes . Our proposed measure can accommodate both ways of measuring 

novelty, but Kuhn’s (1962) notion that ideas are embedded in words - i.e., in the text of scholarly liter-

ature or a patent - suggests using a text -based approach. 

Disruptiveness: Disruptiveness concerns the capacity of innovations or ideas to alter the trajec-

tory of knowledge accumulation and to break with the past (e.g., Funk & Owen -Smith, 2017; Park et al., 

2023; Wu et al., 2019) . Rather than being an addition to the existing corpus of knowledge, a disruptive 

discovery presents a divergence, often rendering prior knowledge redundant and carving out novel paths 

for subsequent inquiries. This concept is encapsulated by Rosenkopf and Nerkar (2001) , who emphasize 

that disruptiveness represents the capacity of an idea to both challenge the status quo and to set the stage 

for future explorations. Such a break from past knowledge induces a shift away from what was previ-

ously known. Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) delve into this idea and suggest that truly disruptive dis-

coveries not only lay the foundation for future discoveries but also lessen the dependence on earlier ones. 

Building upon th ese conceptual point s of departure, Christensen et al. (2018) , Cozzolino et al. (2018) ,

Hopp et al. (2018) , Markides (2006) , and Pinkse et al. (2014) delve into the details of disruption. Leibel 

and Bornmann (2023) review the concept and its measurement .

Complementarity vs. substitutability : As we have argued above, a paradigm shifting discover y

is likely to have a major impact on subsequent inquiry, to be novel, and to break with past trajectories 

(Dosi, 1982; Funk & Owen -Smith, 2017; Kuhn, 1962; Laudan, 1978; Whitley, 2000) . Whereas th e the-

oretical considerations suggests that a focus on the combined effect of these three dimensions is war-

ranted, theoretical reasoning alone cannot determine whether the y should be treated as substitutes or 12 

complements. For example, when determining whether a focal discovery is paradigm shifting, it is pos-

sible that its lower novelty c ould be compensated for by the discovery’s greater impact or disruptiveness. 

In case s like this , the three dimensions could be interpreted to be substitutes. However, they can also be 

complements. In this case, whether a discovery is paradigm shifting depends more on its weakest di-

mension. For example, a lower degree of novelty of the focal discovery can become a constraint when 

it cannot be compensated for by the other, possibly better dimensions , such as greater impact . As we 

will argue in greater detail below, since Kuhn (1962) , the available literature has mostly treated the 

different dimensions as complements when discussing revolutionary science and significant innovations 

(see, e.g., Bornmann & Williams, 2020; Funk & Owen -Smith, 2017; Leahey et al., 2023; Leibel & 

Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) . In our empirical analysis, we use the discoveries of the inventors 

listed in the NIHF to determine whether complementarity or substitutability is supported by the data. 

3. MEASURING PARADIGM SHIFTING DISCOVERIES 

In this section, we turn to measurement. We start with a concise synopsis of the existing disruption 

measures ; Leibel and Bornmann (2023) offer a more comprehensive overview of the existing disruption 

measures, including their conceptual background and strengths and weaknesses. Despite insightful re-

cent advances in the measurement of discoveries’ disruptiveness, there seems to have been only a few 

attempts to simultaneously quantify the impact, novelty, and /or disruptiveness of a discovery. We there-

fore proceed to consider how paradigm shifting discoveries can be quantified based on these three di-

mensions using a single, coherent measure. 

3.1. Existing disruptiveness measures 

Unidimensional measures: A discovery can be consolidating or disruptive, depending on how 

subsequent discoveries (e.g. , patents or publications ) cite it and its prior art. Based on this insight, Funk 

and Owen -Smith (2017) propose identify ing disruptive discoveries by using their CD index that 

measur es the extent to which the focal discovery changes subsequent cit ations . Specifically, if a discov-

ery breaks with the past and renders prior art obsolete, it is disruptive; see also Wu et al. (2019) and Park 

et al. (2023) who – among others – make use of this interpretation. 

To introduce the CD index of Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) more formally , we turn to Figure 1, 

concretely showing how subsequent patents cite the focal patent and its prior art. In this figure, 𝑁 % is the 13 

number of subsequent patents that cite the focal patent, but not its prior art; 𝑁 & is the number of subse-

quent patents that cite both the focal patent and its prior art; and 𝑁 ' is the number of subsequent patents 

that cite the focal patent ’s prior art but not the focal patent itself. 

Figure 1: Elements of the disruptiveness measure.  

> Source: The authors’ drawing on the basis of Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) .

Using this notation, the CD index proposed by Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) is given by 

𝐷 !_)* = +!, +"    

> +!.+".+#

. (1) 

Using (1), we can verify that t he patents citing the focal patent but not its prior art ( 𝑁 %) increase the 

disruptiveness of the focal patent, whereas the subsequent patents citing both the focal patent and its 

prior arts ( 𝑁 &) diminish its disruptiveness. The number of those subsequent patents that build on the 

same prior art of the focal patent but that do not cite the focal patent ( 𝑁 ') decreases the focal patent’s 

disruptiveness. If forward citations to a patent do not at all acknowledge its prior art, the patent is dis-

rupting its field and the focal patent is maximally disruptive ( 𝐷 !_)* = 1). In contrast, the focal patent 

is fully consolidating if 𝐷 !_)* = −1, since such a patent strengthens the ties of subsequent patents to 

the focal patent’s prior art. 

Subsequent literature has suggested several modifications to the CD index. For example, 

Bornmann et al. (2020) modify the CD index by excluding the term 𝑁 ' from its denominator , since it 

seems to empirically dominate CD index values. Their suggested measure is 

𝐷 /012 = +!, +"  

> +!.+"

. (2)   

> !"#$% &$'(F' *

14 

However, excluding 𝑁 ' is not uncontroversial since a focal patent may itself cite very impactful patents 

(𝑁 ' adjusts for this possibility). Chen et al. (2021) and Leydesdorff and Bornmann (2021) argue that the 

potentially multiple roles of a n invention should be acknowledged. They propose using two different 

metrics, one measuring disruptiveness and another consolidation: 

𝐷 2*! ,"1/ = +!    

> +!.+".+#

(3a) 

𝐶 2*! ,"1/ = +"    

> +!.+".+#

(3b) 

Chen et al. (2021) discuss how and why a given invention can be both disruptive and consolidating at 

the same time and suggest measures for capturing this kind of multidimensionality. Bu et al. (2021) 

suggest an independence measure that is closely related to the CD index and to the other disruptiveness 

measures. It is given by 

𝐷 /34 = +!  

> +!.+"

. (4) 

This measure obtains higher values when a patent is not cited together with its prior art, i.e., when the 

focal patent is based on an invention that has been developed relatively independently from the earlier 

ones . We refer the reader to Leibel and Bornmann (2023) for further discussion of these and other related 

measures. 

Two dimensional and multidimensional measures: Several scholars have noted that a discov-

ery’s capacity to impact and disrupt is likely to be multidimensional (Bu et al., 2021; Funk & Owen -

Smith, 2017; Leibel & Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) . The citation -weighted mCD index of Funk 

and Owen -Smith (2017) aims at measuring both the impact and disruptiveness of a discovery. It is ob-

tained by multiplying a discovery’s CD index by its citation count and is given by 

𝐷 !_)*  

> 5

= (+! . +")(+!, +")    

> +!.+".+#

= (+!      

> $,+"
> $)
> +!.+".+#

, (5) 

showing that 𝐷 !_)*  

> 5

= 𝐹 × 𝐷 !_)* where 𝐹 ≡ 𝑁 % + 𝑁 &. Unfortunately, this measure is sensitive to vari-

ation s in citation counts due to different scale s of the CD index and the citation count (Leibel & 

Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) . This leads to counterintuitive outcomes since multiplying a discov-

ery’s CD -index by its citation count amplifies minor differences in the former. Specifically, we show 15 

that highly cited discoveries obtain ing CD index values relatively close to zero may end up appearing 

extremely disruptive (or consolidating) in light of the mCD index. 

Wei et al. (2023) propose keeping the CD index and citation counts separate and using cutoff 

values to determine , which discoveries are consistent with revolutionary science. They suggest zero as 

a cutoff for disruptiveness ( the CD index ) and 𝑒 8 ≈ 7.4 as a cutoff for impact (the number of citations ).

A challenge with this approach is, however, that the appropriate thresholds are difficult to determine, 

leaving it open whether all those patents for which the CD index is greater than zero and for which the 

number of citations is more than eight should be regarded revolutionary science. For example, the 

thresholds do not necessarily allow identifying discoveries that are unique in these dimensions relative 

to other discoveries. 

Bu et al. (2021) acknowledge that the impact of a research contribution (e.g., a publication or a 

patent) can be multidimensional. They argue that to characterize this , one must pay attention not only 

to the size of impact (e.g., the number of citations) but also to the qualitative nature of citation patterns, 

such as depth and breadth as well as dependence and independence of the citation impact. However, 

they propose neither a way to integrate these measures nor to link them to paradigm shifting discoveries. 

Both Kelly et al. (2021) and Park et al. (2023) introduce measures for assessing patent quality by 

integrating novelty and impact into a single metric. Kelly et al. (2021) compare textual similarities be-

tween patents to discern a patent ’s novelty and impact. Their dynamic weighting methodology normal-

izes a term ’s importance over time, and they deploy an index to pinpoint “breakthrough ” innovations. 

They employ citation data for validation and show that their text -based approach offers a consistent 

representation of inventions prior to 1945 , when citation practices were less standardized. 

The analysis of Park et al. (2023) allows for distinct meanings of backward and forward citation 

similarity, the incorporation of multiple words/topics in the text analysis (suggesting semantic multidi-

mensionality), and the possibility of measuring quality over varying time horizons. To be more specific, 

Park et al. (2023) introduce two normalized versions of the CD index to measure disruption, adjusting 

for the number of citations by the focal paper/patent and accounting for field differences and time trends. 

They further explore an alternative disruption measure, 𝐷𝐼 ∗, which makes the index less sensitive to 

small changes in the forward citation patterns of papers/patents that have no backward citations. They 16 

also use randomized citation networks to gauge disruption trends. Nonetheless, the ir empirical analysis 

primarily emphasizes the unidimensional measure of disruptiveness , the CD index in particular .

In contrast to these recent advances, we propose combining the existing disruption measures with 

the standard measures of impact and novelty, and using all three as inputs to an integrative measure that 

is easy to interpret. We turn to the development of such a measure now. 

3.2 A n ew multidimensional measure of paradigm shifting discoveries (𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 )

Our starting point for developing a multidimensional measure for paradigm shifting discoveries 

is the well -known mathematical formulae for the weighted generalized (power) mean i.e., 

𝑀 >(𝑧 ?, … , 𝑧 * ) ≡ :∑ 𝛼 @(𝑧 @)>* 

> @A?

=

> %
> &

, where 

s is a non -zero real number, 𝛼 @ are non -negative weights that 

sum to one, and 𝑧 @ denotes a generic positive real number (see, e.g., Bullen, 2003) . Our approach is 

inspired by Perry and Reny (2016) and Haley (2019) . Perry and Reny (2016) present a new method for 

summarizing a researcher’s publication record using the generalized mean . Haley (2019) us es a

weighted power mean version of the Euclidean index for the same purpose. As Perry and Reny (2016) 

note, the weighted generalized mean is linked to the 𝑙 > norm in mathematics, the constant elasticity of 

substitution (CES) production function in economics, the poverty index (Foster et al., 1984) , and the 

measure of income inequality (Atkinson, 1970) . Ahmadpoor and Jones (2019) use a version of it to 

model how research teams generate patents and publications. 

We use the generalized mean, 𝑀 >(𝑧 ?, … , 𝑧 * ), to capture the idea that the tendency of a discovery 

to be paradigm shifting depends on its (i) impact on future technologies, (ii) novelty, and (iii) ability to 

break with the past . Specifically, we use the percentages of the cumulative distribution of discoveries’ 

impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the past as the normalized inputs ( 𝑧 @) over which the gen-

eralized mean is calculated. We now turn to the measurement of the three dimensions , illustrate the 

importance of the normalization, and discuss the properties of 𝐷 !"#$ which motivate its use. In the dis-

cussion that follows, we let 𝑥 @ denote a raw measure and 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) the associated percentages of the cu-

mulative distribution of 𝑥 @.

Dimensions of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 and their normalization : The first measure capture s discoveries’ impact .

For that, we use patents’ citation counts (𝑥 ? ≡ 𝐹 ), measured five years after they were granted. Second, 17 

to capture novelty, we use new keyword combinations (Gerken & Moehrle, 2012; Kim et al., 2016; 

Yoon & Park, 2005) . We resort on the text -based approach, as it directly reflects a patent’s written 

content (i.e. what the underlying idea is about) and as it is unclear which level of patent classes would 

properly capture novelty in our application (Righi & Simcoe, 2019) . In our empirical analysis, we use 

the results from a text -based analysis of new keyword s by Arts et al. (2021) - the number of new key-

word combinations (𝑥 8 ≡ 𝐾 ). Third , to capture a discovery’s tendency to render prior work obsolete ,

we use the CD index (𝑥 B ≡ 𝐷 !_)* ) and, in alternative analyses, its variants (𝐷 /012 , 𝐷 2*! ,"1/ , and 

𝐷 /34 ). In line with prior work (Bornmann et al., 2020; Leydesdorff et al., 2021; Park et al., 2023) on 

the normalization of citation -based measures, we standardize the dimensions – 𝑥 ?, 𝑥 8, 𝑥 B –, over which 

the generalized mean is calculated by using the percentages of their respective cumulative distributions 

(Bornmann & Williams, 2020) , i.e., using 𝐺 @(𝑥 @). This normalization means that the variables over 

which the generalized mean is calculated are 𝑓 @ = 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) for s = 1,2,3 and that the raw variables 𝑥 @ are 

transformed to the same scale from zero to one and have the same unit of measurement. Crucially, th is 

normalization also allows ranking patents relative to their comparators in terms of their impact, novelty, 

and tendency to break with the past and then to combine these rankings (using a comparable scale ). For 

example, consider a focal patent with 𝑥 ? = 6 forward citations. Using the percentage of the cumulative 

forward citation distribution of the relevant pool of comparator patents gives 𝐺 ?(6), which is equal to 

the percentage of patents receiv ing 𝑥 ? = 6 or fewer forward citations than the focal patent . The larger 

the percentage of patents receiv ing fewer forward citations than the focal patent, the more impactful the 

focal patent. Similar reasoning applies to the normalization of the other dimensions (𝑥 8, 𝑥 B).

How the cumulative distribution is calculated depends on the research question. If the goal is to 

learn about the development of paradigm shifting discoveries over time in different fields , the percent-

ages of the cumulative distributions need to be calculated by field . This normalization enables an anal-

ysis of time patterns within each field .7 It also is consistent with the goal of being able to quantify para-

digm shifts within a broadly defined field. On the other hand, if the goal is to analyze whether there are       

> 7Both Kelly et al. (2021) and Park et al. (2023) emphasize the need to adjust for evolving norms when analyzing
> patents over time (see also Kuhn et al., 2020) .

18 

more paradigm shifting discoveries in certain field at a given point in time, a normalization by (grant) 

years or cohorts is needed. 

Definition of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 : Using the notation for the generalized mean from above, the proposed 

measure is given by 𝑀 > (𝑧 ?, 𝑧 8, 𝑧 B ) = 𝑀 >(𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8), 𝐺 B(𝑥 B) ). It can be writ ten explicitly as fol-

lows: 

𝐷 !"#$ ≡ D𝛼 ?(𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?))> + 𝛼 8(𝐺 8(𝑥 8))> + 𝛼 B(𝐺 B(𝑥 B))>& , (6) 

where 𝜎 is a parameter of the generalized mean determining its shape (see below), (𝛼 ?, 𝛼 8, 𝛼 B) are non -

negative weight parameters that sum to one, and 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) refers to the percentages of the cumulative dis-

tribution of 𝑥 &. Since each 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) is measured on the unit interval, 𝐷 !"#$ ranges from zero to one . It is 

increasing in the propensity of a discovery to be paradigm shifting, with 𝐷 !"#$ = 1 indicating a n ex-

tremely unique discovery in terms of all the three dimensions. As equation (6) shows, 𝐷 !"#$ is modular, 

in the sense that it combines distinct dimensions (impact, novelty, and disruptiveness) into a single, 

coherent measure. This property of 𝐷 !"#$ aligns with the concept of modularity used to understand the 

architecture of complex systems, as discussed by Brusoni et al. (2023) . Just as modularity allows for the 

decomposition of complex systems into simpler, more manageable components, 𝐷 !"#$ captures the es-

sence of paradigm shifting discoveries by integrating their key dimensions in a transparent and flexible 

manner. 

Properties of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 : The generalized mean nests , as special cases , the arithmetic mean (𝜎 = 1), 

geometric mean (𝜎 

® 0), and harmonic mean (𝜎 = −1). The arithmetic mean corresponds to the case 

when the included features are substitutes with each other, i.e., the case when a decrease in (say) forward 

citations can be compensated by an increas e in novelty. A key property of the generalized mean is that 

parameter 𝜎 determines how the dimensions (i.e., 𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8) and 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)) produce – in combina-

tion – the value of 𝐷 !"#$ . Holding other things constant, the dimension with the highest 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) becomes 

more influential when 𝜎 increases; in the limit, when 𝜎 → ∞, 𝐷 !"#$ = max {𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8), 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)}

implying that only the maximum of the three dimensions matter. When 𝜎 decreases , the dimension with 

the lowest 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) becomes more important; in the limit, when 𝜎 → −∞ , 𝐷 !"#$ =

min {𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8), 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)}, implying that only the minimum of the three dimensions matter. In this 19 

latter case, 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) are strict complements, which means that a discovery’s potential to be paradigm 

shifting is determined by its weakest dimension. As we will see, this turns out to be important in our 

empirical application. 

It is worth pointing out additional properties of 𝐷 !"#$ . First , it embeds the unidimensional 

measures as special cases. For example, if the capacity of a discovery to be paradigm shifting is solely 

determined by it being extremely highly cited, 𝐷 !"#$ can capture this : when 𝛼 8 = 𝛼 B = 0 and 𝜎 = 1, 

we have 𝐷 !"#$ = 𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), meaning that 𝐷 !"#$ ranks discoveries solely in terms of their citation s. Simi-

larly, if 𝛼 ? = 𝛼 8 = 0 and 𝜎 = 1, then 𝐷 !"#$ = 𝐺 B(𝑥 B) ranks discoveries solely in terms of their disrup-

tiveness . Second, if 𝜎 → 0, the limit of the weighted generalized mean is 𝐷 !"#$ =

𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?)C% 𝐺 8(𝑥 8)C$ 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)C' (i.e., the geometric mean). To illustrate the connection of this to the mCD 

index, we can envisage that novelty does not matter ( 𝛼 8 = 0) and that 𝛼 ? = 𝛼 B = 1. With these param-

eter restrictions, we obtain a (scaled) version of the mCD index, i.e., 𝐷 !"#$ = 𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?)𝐺 ?(𝑥 B), which is 

the product of the normalized citation count and the normalized CD index . The normalization removes 

the problem emerg ing from the different scales , suggesting that this special case of 𝐷 !"#$ provid es an 

alternative way to solv e the issue raised also by Wei et al. (2023) .

The main goal of the empirical analysis is that we calibrate the parameters of 𝐷 !"#$ and explore 

whether complementarity or substitutability is supported by the data. We then make use of this calibra-

tion later to predict discoveries in unseen USPTO data (not used for the calibration) .

4. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS 

4.1. Data 

Data sources: We use patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark Office 

(USPTO), for which an NBER (National Bureau of Economic Research) industry code s are available 

(obtained from patentsview.org ). The patents are matched to text -based keyword information from Arts 

et al. (2021) . Since the text -based keyword data are sparse for 1980 and 1981 and since the NBER codes 

are not available to us from May 2015 onwards , o ur sample runs from 1982 /01 to 2015 /06 , contain ing 

4,710,610 utility patents. When identifying forward citations and components of the disruption measures 

(i.e., Ni, Nj and Nk), we include th e citations irrespective of who (e.g., the assignee /inventor vs. patent 20 

examiner ) has added them . Furthermore, we also account for the citations emerging from subsequent 

design and other non -utility patents .

We also use data collected from the National Inventor s Hall of Fame (NIHF). We use NIHF in-

ventions as manifestations of paradigm shifting discoveries and use USPTO patents related to them to 

calibrate the parameters of 𝐷 !"#$ in our empirical analysis. NIHF inductees are chosen based on their 

discoveries that have created a tangible impact on society and significantly advanced the fields of sci-

ence and technology, serving as a testament to human ingenuity and inspiration for future generations .8

The goal of these criteria is to ensure that only the most transformative innovations are honored – to sort 

out inventions that are not mere improvements but are foundational shifts in scientific and technological 

capability. NIHF’s criteria revolve around the impact of an invention on the welfare of the nation, ad-

vancement of science, and the benefits it brings to the public. The patents protecting NIHF -recognized 

innovations represent paradigm shifting discoveries because they have laid an acknowledged foundation 

for new discoveries or revolutionize d existing ones . Specifically, the nominees must hav e made a dis-

covery that, according to a panel of experts in science, technology, and engineering, is considered “ a

groundbreaking or a significant advancement ” in the nominee’s field, suggesting that the patents rec-

ognized by NIHF represent instances of paradigm shifting discoveries. An example of a NIHF technol-

ogy covered by a USPTO patent is the transistor (US2524035), which underpins all modern electronics 

and computing. Similarly, the NIHF -recognized discovery for CRISPR gene -editing technology 

(US86973 59) has fundamentally changed the landscape of genetic engineering, enabling precise and 

efficient modification of DNA in organisms. These discoveries redefined what was feasible at the time. 

Finally , we use patents identified as significant in the prior research and data on the so -called 

evergreen patents on pharmaceutical inventions included in the Orange Book (Durvasula et al., 2023, 

see also Appendix D) . We use these data to illustrate how the proposed measure works .

Descriptive statistics: Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the five -year forward citations 

(𝐹 ), the text -based measure for new keyword combinations ( 𝐾 ), and the constituents used to calculate    

> 8See criteria for selection at the National Inventors Hall of Fame: https://www.invent.org/inductees/nominate -
> inventor (last visited 8 November 2023).

21 

various disruptiveness measures, i.e., backward citations ( 𝐵 ), 𝑁 %, 𝑁 &, and 𝑁 '.9 As can be seen from Ta-

ble 1, the mean number of forward citations, 𝐹 , is 3. 38, but the median (p50) is just 1. Novelty, as 

captured by 𝐾 , also has a skewed distribution . The mean of 𝐾 is 123, but the media n is only 19. 

Table 1: Descriptive statistics. 

4.2. Empirical properties of existing disruption measures 

Despite going through challenges with the existing disruption measures in this section , our inten-

tion is not to criticize the m. Quite the contrary , and as we wrote above, we suggest using them as a n

input to the proposed measure .

Property #1 – Moderate impact and novelty : Table 2 reports impact and novelty statistics for 

USPTO patents obtaining high values in terms of four existing disruption measures, i.e., 𝐷 !_)* , 𝐷 /012 ,

𝐷 0*! ,"1/ , and 𝐷 /34 . In Panel A of Table 2, we use the absolute value of 0.90 as a threshold for high 

disruptiveness . In Panel B, we use the 90 th percentile (p90) of each measure’s distribution to capture 

patents for which relative disruptiveness is high. 

As can be seen from Table 2, two of the scores, 𝐷 /012 and 𝐷 /34 , obtain their maximum values 

(of one) for more than 1. 4 million patents , implying that they have mass point s at the extreme right tails 

of their distributions (in line with Holst et al., 2024; see also our discussion below) . Moreover, most of 

the patents with high disruption scores have less than five forward citations. The median (mean) number 

of forward citations among disruptive -looking patents is low, ranging from 1 to 2. Specifically, of the                                                                   

> 9We winsorize the extreme values in the 99.9999% in the upper tail , i.e., replace the higher values of 4 observa-
> tions with the value at the 99.9999% percentile.
> Mean St. dev. p5 p25 p50 p75 p95 Min .Max .
> F3. 380 7. 818 001412 01,042
> K123.527 2,259.131 0219 73 366 01,440 ,810
> B12.169 34.693 03511 28 05,802
> Ni1. 926 4. 538 001270496
> Nj1.453 5.919 0001601,032
> Nk15 8.007 58 2.757 08309662 1064 ,827

22 

patents for which the CD index (DF_OS ) value is exactly one ( indicating maximal disruptive ness ), 53% 

have one forward citation and 23% have two forward citations. The median number of new keyword 

combinations range s from 19 to 27, indicating moderate degree s of novelty (at best) .

Table 2: Characteristics of disruptive patents as identified by the existing measures .

Panel A Disruptiveness score ³ 0.90 

(absolute threshold) 

𝐷 !_&' 𝐷 ()*+ 𝐷 )'! ,"*( 𝐷 (-. 

Number of disruptive patents 191 ,526 1,486,255 191 ,659 1,514,410 

Share of disruptive patents 0.040 0. 315 0.0 40 0. 321 

Conditional descriptive statistics 

Share of patents with < 5 F 0.8 45 0.85 0 0.8 44 0.83 4

Mean F 3.2 31 3.0 47 3. 249 3.2 89 

Median F 2 2 2 2

Mean K 211.35 125 .929 211 .151 126 .401 

Median K 29 20 29 20 

Panel B Disruptiveness score ³ 90 th percentile 

(relative threshold) 

𝐷 !_&' 𝐷 ()*+ 𝐷 )'! ,"*( 𝐷 (-. 

Number of disruptive patents 486 ,062 1,480 ,377 471 ,128 1,480 ,337 

Share of disruptive patents 0.10 3 0. 314 0.100 0. 314 

Conditional descriptive statistics 

Share of patents with < 5 F 0. 732 0.85 3 0. 704 0.85 3

Mean F 4.603 2.8 88 4.892 2.8 88 

Median F 2 2 3 2

Mean K 167 .670 125 .863 171 .193 125 .863 

Median K 27 20 27 20 23 

Property #2 – Concentration at extreme values : Inspired by the findings reported in Table 2 

above, by a comment made by Bornmann et al. (2020) , and by Holst et al. (2024) , we display the full 

distribution of 𝐷 !_)* in Figure 2 .10 As can be seen, there is a substantial difference between the number 

of patents that obtain the maximum value at the right end of the distribution and just slightly below .

Relative to Holst et al. (2024) , a novelty here is that we find that there also is a concentration at the right 

tail of the other proposed variants of the unidimensional disruption measure s (see the corresponding 

distributions for 𝐷 /012 , 𝐷 2*! ,"1/ and 𝐷 /34 in Appendix A). The mass point on the right is thus not 

just a characteristic of the CD index. Such non -smooth right tail behavior of disruptiveness is counter-

intuitive and not desirable , as it suggests a discontinuity in the quality of the most exceptional discover-

ies (when, in reality, there is none) .

Figure 2: Histogram of 𝑫 𝑭 _𝑶𝑺 (the CD index)    

> 10 To focus on the right tail of the distribution of these measures, we display their histograms conditional on the
> measures obtaining positive values.

24 

Property #3 – Different scal es : As we have noted earlier , the citation -weighted mCD index of 

Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) is sensitive to variation in citation counts due to different scale s of the 

CD index and the citation count (see also Leibel & Bornmann, 2023) . Figure 3 illustrates this. It displays 

patents with the CD index values in range [ -0.20, 0.20] and their corresponding mCD -index values, with 

the dotted horizontal lines showing various percentiles of the mCD -index in the whole data . As can be 

seen, the scale difference amplifies minor differences in the CD index values for highly cited patents. 25 

Figure 3: Scatter plot of the mCD index and the CD index .

Summary: In sum, patents obtain ing high values for 𝐷 !_)* , 𝐷 /012 , 𝐷 2*! ,"1/ , and 𝐷 /34 are 

not, on average, high ly cited and particularly novel. Furthermore, the distributions of these measures 

tend to concentrate at the extreme right end of the distribution s. Finally, a citation -weighted version of 

the CD index (mCD) amplifies minor differences in the CD index . In line with the remarks made by ,

e.g. , Leibel and Bornmann (2023) and Macher et al. (2023) , we interpret these observations to speak for 26 

a need to find additional ways of identifying discoveries that are paradigm shifting. We now turn to such 

an endeavor and look for a parametrization of 𝐷 !"#$ applicable to the USPTO data. 

4.2. Estimation/calibration of the parameters of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 

We use arguments from the prior literature and empirical analysis to find a plausible parameteri-

zation (𝛼 ?, 𝛼 8, 𝛼 B, 𝜎 ) of 𝐷 !"#$ .

Theoretical arguments: While the question of whether a discovery’s impact, novelty and dis-

ruptiveness are complementary or substitutes has not been widely discussed, already the seminal writ-

ings, such as Kuhn (1962) and Dosi (1982) , apparently alluded to the importance of complementarities. 

Echoing this, the work of Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) suggest s – via the multiplication of the CD 

index by the number of forward citations – that a degree of complementarity is assumed. Several sub-

sequent works follow this lead. In considering several alternative disruption indices and specifications, 

Bornmann et al. (2020) find that imposing a minimum threshold for the number of forward citations of 

a focal paper improves identification of disruptive contributions. This implies a complementary between 

forward citations and disruptiveness. Bu et al. (2021) suggest separating disruptiveness (or depth) and 

impact in a manner that implies complementary. While Wei et al. (2023) argue that the citation impact 

is an overly dominant term of the mCD index, their matrix for capturing revolutionary science, based 

on citation counts and disruptiveness scores, preserves the complementary assumption. Leahey et al. 

(2023) and Leibel and Bornmann (2023) also put forward arguments that speak for complementarity. 

While these considerations have no direct implications for the weight parameters of 𝐷 !"#$ (i.e., for 

𝛼 ?, 𝛼 8, 𝛼 B), they clearly suggest that 𝜎 ought to take on negative values . However, the literature does 

not seem to provide any guidance on the magnitude of the possible complementarity (and thus on suit-

able value of 𝜎 ). 

Empirical analysis : To proceed empirically, we must overcome the fundamental challenge of 

no t having systematic data on paradigm shifting discoveries. To circumvent this problem, we use the 

USPTO patents connected to the NIHF discoveries . As explained earlier, they can be consider ed as 

manifestations of paradigm shifting discoveries. We can identify 105 patents protecting NIHF discov-

eries in our USPTO data. Among these patents, the patent grant years vary from 1982 to 2014, whereas 

the years of NIHF -induction (nomination) range from 1991 to 2023. Among these patents, the difference 27 

between the patent grant year and the induction year by NIHF is on average 19.8 years (median = 18). 

This means that the induction decision is based on a dispersed and rich set of qualitative and quantitative 

information that has cumulated over each discovery’s ( patent ’s) lifecycle and that has become available 

over time to those making the nomination. The NIHF nomination can be seen as a summary indicator 

of this information, allowing an identification of paradigm shifting discoveries. 

We match these patents to a random subsample of USPTO patents (see Appendix B for the de-

scriptive statistics) . This means that we obtain a case -control sample with contaminated controls 

(Imbens & Lancaster, 1996, p. 146) – this is also called the case -population design. Unlike standard 

applications of choice -based sampling in econometrics (e.g., Hsieh et al., 1985; Imbens, 1992) and rare 

event s analyses in statistics (e.g., King & Zeng, 2001) , the case -population design consists of one sub-

sample, selected fully on the outcome variable (“1”) for which also the relevant covariates are observed, 

and another subsample drawn randomly from the whole population, for which only the covariates ob-

served. Because there is no information on the outcome (“0” vs. “1”) for these patents, the random 

subsample is “contaminated”. 

We use the percentages of the cumulative distributions of patents’ impact ( 𝑥 ?= F ), novelty ( 𝑥 8=

K) and disruptiveness ( 𝑥 B= 𝐷 !_)* ) as the input variables (i.e., 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) for s =1,2,3) . Empirically, the 

three dimensions are only moderately, if at all, correlated. For example, when calculated separately for 

each NBER industry, the pairwise correlation coefficients between the raw measures, 𝑥 ?, 𝑥 8, and 𝑥 B,

vary from -0. 03 to 0. 06 in the USPTO data. Therefore, they contain independent information about the 

potential of a discovery to be paradigm shifting. For our baseline empirical analysis, we calculate the 

percentages of the cumulative distributions of each dimension 𝑥 @ by each NBER industry . This choice 

allows us to focus on potential paradigm shifts that may transform specific industries. 

To accommodate the specific nature of the case -control sample with contaminated controls, we 

use two econometric approaches. First, we estimate the parameters of 𝐷 !"#$ using a maximum likeli-

hood (ML) estimator introduced by Steinberg and Cardell (1992) .11 Second, we use the generalized      

> 11 See also Imbens and Lancaster (1996) ,who use the ML estimator in their simulations .

28 

method of moment s (GMM) approach of Imbens and Lancaster (1996, p. 150) . These two approaches 

can accommodate any probability model, such as Logit, but we impose the structure of 𝐷 !"#$ from 

Equation (6) .12 The measure varies on the unit interval by design because of the normalization of the 

measures for citations, novelty, and disruptiveness. Finally, the estimators adjust by design for the fact 

that the model is fitted to a specific sample of patents (the case -control sample with contaminated con-

trols) . This property mean s that the estimated parameters are general in the sense that they apply to all 

USPTO patents (and not just the specific estimation sample). They can therefore be used to assign a 

likelihood of disruptive discovery to all patents based on their observable c haracteristics (i.e., based on 

each patent’ s 𝐺 @(𝑥 @) for s =1,2,3). 

Estimation/calibration results : Our results can be summarized succinctly (see Appendix B for 

details): First, we find systematic evidence that 𝜎 tends to be negative, suggesting that the discoveries’ 

citations, novelty, and disruptiveness are complementary. Second, both the ML and GMM estimations 

generate estimates of 𝜎 that are large in absolute value . In particular, the estimates are negative enough 

to mean that, in practice , 𝐷 !"#$ can be approximated by the minimum over the three dimensions, i.e., 

by 𝐷 !"#$ ≅ min{ 𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8), 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)}, in our particular application (see Appendix B for details) .13 

Quite remarkably, this empirical finding is nicely consistent with the arguments from the prior literature 

that speak for the importance of complementarities. Moreover, w e have performed several sensitivity 

checks , such as used alternative numerical optimization methods, considered alternative random draws 

from the USPTO, and varied the inputs over which 𝐷 !"#$ is calculated, to make sure that 𝜎 parameter 

indeed tends to negative values that are large enough in absolute terms to warrant the use of the minimum 

approximation (see Appendix B for details of these sensitivity checks ).                        

> 12 See Carvalho and Soares (2016) for an economic application, Rosenfeld (2017) for a political science application,
> and Lele (2009) ,Keating and Cherry (2004) , and Rota et al. (2013) for applications in animal ecology.
> 13 While in principle this limit is obtained only when 𝜎 →−∞,already much less negative values mean that the
> minimum is a good approximation .This also means that the values of the weights, i.e., (𝛼 /,𝛼 0,𝛼 1),no longer bear
> on the values that 𝐷 !"#$ takes ; see Appendix B for details and further discussion.

29 

4.3. Properties of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 

Finding that the discoveries’ citations, novelty, and disruptiveness are str ictly complementary, 

i.e., 𝐷 !"#$ ≅ 𝑚𝑖𝑛 (𝐺 ?(𝑥 ?), 𝐺 8(𝑥 8), 𝐺 B(𝑥 B)) , is intuitively plausible. Specifically, it suggests that –

whether a discovery is considered paradigm shifting – depends on its weakest dimension (relative to the 

other discoveries ). To see this concretely, consider a hypothetical focal patent with 𝐷 !"#$ = min (0. 40 ,

0.90, 0. 95 ) = 0. 40. The interpretation is that when compared to the other patents in the NBER industry 

class to which this patent belongs to , 40 % have fewer forward citations than this focal patent; 90% of 

them have fewer new keyword combinations, and as many as 95 % of them have a lower CD index value. 

When compared to its comparator patents, the capacity of this focal patent to be paradigm shifting is 

constrained by its low impact , despite it being quite unique in terms of its novelty and disr uptiveness .

The strict complementarit y mean s that lack of impact cannot be compensated for by greater novelty or 

disruptiveness. This discussion demonstrates the gain of putting the three measures together as opposed 

to using them in isolation; as we will see in our empirical application, it is the weakest of the three 

dimensions that determines the tendency of a discovery to be paradigm shifting. 

Figure 4 shows the complete histogram of 𝐷 !"#$ , using USPTO data from 1982 to 2015. 14 Our 

interest is on how 𝐷 !"#$ works near the right tail of the histogram, which identifies the patents that are 

unique in terms of their impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the past. As can be seen, the distri-

bution is well -behaved in its right tail (i.e., there is no “discontinuity” among the most exceptional tech-

nologies) .15 Specifically, there is no concentration of observations at the right end of the distribution, 

suggesting that the behavior of 𝐷 !"#$ is smooth where it matters the most .         

> 14 Among all the USPTO patents in our sample, the mean value of 𝐷 !"#$ is 0.26, whereas the median and the 90th
> percentile are, respectively, 0.17 and 0.60.
> 15 Wecontinue to use the percentages of the cumulative distributions of each dimension, calculated by each NBER
> industry . We show the distribution of 𝐷 !"#$ that use two alternative normalizations (year and year -industry) in
> Appendix C.

30 

Figure 4: Histogram of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 .

Table 4 displays the characteristics of patents that can be considered to be potential ly paradigm 

shifting in light of their high 𝐷 !"#$ values ; we use the same two thresholds as those in Table 2 , i.e., the 

absolute value of 0.90 and the distribution ’s 90 th percentile , p90 . As can be seen, the absolute and the 

relative threshold values allow identifying a subset of patents that are clearly more impactful and novel 

and that have a greater tendency to render earlier technologies obsolete. For example, the average values 

of 0.95 , 0.95 and 0.94 for G1(x1), G2(x2) and G3(x3), respectively, mean that the patents with 𝐷 !"#$ ≥

0.90 belong, on average, to the highest 9 4th percentile of their respective forward citation, keyword , and 

CD index distributions. There are 1 0,804 USPTO patents with 𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.90 , representing 0.2% of all 

USPTO patents in our sample . This is an encouraging result, suggesting that the measure is capable of 

capturing patents that are simultaneously unique in all these dimensions. Using the relative threshold 

leads to a more relaxed criterion, but nevertheless identifies discoveries that are, on average, clearly 

impactful, novel, and disruptive , as can be seen from the respective means of G1(x1), G2(x2) and G3(x3). 31 

Table 4: Characteristics of patents with high vs. low 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 values. 

Absolute threshold 

(value) 

Relative threshold 

(percentile) 

𝐷 !"#$ < 0.90 𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.90 𝐷 !"#$ < p90 𝐷 !"#$ ≥ p90 

Number of patents 4,69 9,806 10,804 4,932 ,270 47 1,340 

Share of patents 0.997 0.002 0.899 0.100 

Conditional descriptive statistics 

Share of patents with F < 5 0.79 1 0 0.8 26 0.4 61 

Mean of feature x1 (= F) 3. 345 18. 119 2. 951 7.2 34 

Mean of feature x2 (= K) 121. 144 1159 .873 10 3.109 307 .164 

Mean of feature x3 (= 𝐷 !_&' ) 0.0 71 0. 545 0.0 55 0. 226 

Mean of G1(x1) 0.49 8 0.9 49 0.466 0. 797 

Mean of G2(x2) 0.49 8 0.95 4 0.465 0.8 11 

Mean of G3(x3) 0.49 8 0.94 1 0.46 4 0.8 16

4.4. Validation and case studies 

Long -term citations: Paradigm shifting patents alter trajector ies of subsequent inquiry. Because 

they constitute a break with the past and lay ground for further discoveries, their impact can come with 

a considerable lag. Building on this insight, Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) use d long -term citations to 

identify truly impactful discoveries and then connected those to their disruption measures. Following 

their lead, we look at patents ’ impact well beyond the time window used to determine their 𝐷 !"#$ values. 

To obtain Figures 5 and 6, we first group patents granted from 1982 to 1990 (558,172 patents) to 

ten bins of equal length by their 𝐷 !"#$ values and then calculate by the bin the forward citations they 

receive by 2015 – long after the time window used to determine their 𝐷 !"#$ values. When calculating 

the number of these long -term citations, we subtract the number of five -year citations, to make sure that 

there is no mechanical connection between patents’ 𝐷 !"#$ values and their long -term impact. As Figure 32 

5 suggests, the average number of long -term forward citations is clearly highest for patents with the 

highest 𝐷 !"#$ values, with a distinct increase in the right most tail (i.e., between the last two bins ). Figure 

6 shows the most impactful patents, defined as those subsequently receiving at least 120 forward cita-

tions – corresponding to the upper 1% tail of the long -term citation distribution. As can be seen, also the 

share of the most impactful patents grows with 𝐷 !"#$ . The jump between the last two bins is even more 

pronounced, as the share of the high -impact patents nearly doubles between the last two bins of 𝐷 !"#$ .

Taken together, these two figures indicate that the highest values of 𝐷 !"#$ allow us to sort out discov-

eries that become extremely impactful over time (see Appendix C for similar graphs, drawn based on 

the percentiles of 𝐷 !"#$ ), based on patent data information that is available five years after they have 

be en granted. 

Figure 5: Average number of long -term citations by bins of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 .33 

Figure 6: Share of patents with long -term citations ³ p99 by bins of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 .

Examples: An alternative way to see how 𝐷 !"#$ performs is to consider known examples of 

patented discoveries that have been considered important elsewhere in the literature . In what follows, 

we build on Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) , Chen et al. (2021) , and Verhoeven et al. (2016) for this 

purpose. When evaluating how paradigm shifting the patents considered by these authors appear to be ,

we use the relative criterion (i.e., the 90 th percentile value of 𝐷 !"#$ Û 𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.60 ) as well as the 

much more stringent absolute criterion (i.e., 𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.90 Û the 99,998 th percentile value of 𝐷 !"#$ ). 

Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) discuss a few illustrative patents . In their view, t he most disruptive 

of them is the patent on polymerase chain reaction (US4683202) – commonly considered to be one of 

the founding inventions of modern biotechnology (Arts & Veugelers, 2014; Verhoeven et al., 2016) .

The USPTO data reveals that for this patent we have ( G1(36), G2(308), G3(1)) = (0.9 89 , 0.8 06, 0.9 73 ),

yielding 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.8 06 . This value is based on the data that was available five years after the patent had 

been granted . It indicates that , at the time, the discovery was truly unique in terms of its impact and 

disruptiveness but its capacity to be paradigm shifting was constrained by its relatively moderate novelty. 

Specifically, i t is paradigm shifting if we consider the relative criterion (𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.60 ) but not if we 

consider the stricter absolute criterion (𝐷 !"#$ ≥ 0.90 ). Another patent considered by Funk and Owen -

Smith (2017) pertains to the atomic force microscope (US4724318), which is one of the central inven-

tions in the field of nanotechnology. Although it was a radical improvement over prior art, the patent 34 

was considered by Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) to be neither clearly consolidating nor disruptive. In 

our data, we observe ( G1(24), G2(322 ), G3(0. 027 )) = (0.9 87 , 0.9 75 , 0.6 38 ), giving 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.6 38 . This 

value suggests that the discovery is barely paradigm shifting according to the relative criterion (and 

clearly not according to the absolute criterion ).16 

Finally, Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) also point out two patents that intuitively seem disruptive 

but are not so according to their CD index. The first one is Eastman Kodak’s patent for an early digital 

camera (US5016107), which contributed to a digital revolution in imaging (leading to Kodak’ s bank-

ruptcy, as it missed the opportunity despite its early lead) .17 For this patent, we observe ( G1(19), G2(116), 

G3(0.0 29 )) = (0.98 0, 0. 895 , 0.6 46 ), resulting in 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.6 46 . This discovery seems to be paradigm 

shifting by a very narrow margin if the less stringent relative criterion is used. The second one, Stanford 

University’s patent for node ranking in a linked database (US6285999) , underlies Google’s PageRank 

search algorithm and thus centrally contributed to modern ways of using the internet (and led Google to 

replace alternatives such as Altavista, Gopher, and Yahoo). For this patent, we observe ( G1(31), G2(194), 

G3(0.16 2)) = (0.98 4, 0.93 1, 0. 893 ), giving 𝐷 !"#$ = 0. 893 . Th is patent is almost paradigm shifting also 

according to the stringer absolute criterion. 

Chen et al. (2021) use MIT’s patent for receiver -compatible enhanced television system 

(US5010405) as an example of a “destabilizing breakthrough” technology, while AsgrowSeed’s patent 

for a hybrid soybean is their example of a “consolidating breakthrough” (US5576474). For t he former, 

we find that ( G1(9), G2(294), G3(0.47 4)) = (0.9 18 , 0.97 1, 0.9 40 ), and 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.9 18 , suggesting that 

based on the data that was available five years after the patent grant, the discovery looked paradigm 

shifting both according to the relative and absolute criteria . For the consolidating one, our data reveals 

that ( G1(18), G2(0), G3(-0. 643 )) = (0.96 0, 0.04 1, 0.0 03 ), and 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.0 03 . 

> 16

Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) also discuss a few examples that, in their consideration, are not disruptive but 

rather consolidating. These include a method applied in oil and gas drilling that enables better extraction of carbon 

monoxide and hydrogen from tar sands (US4573530) and a ne w genetically engineered soybean variety 

(US6958436). In our data, the values of ( G1(x1), G2(x2), G3(x3)) are ( G1(1), G2(41), G3(0.25)) = (0. 391 , 0.67 1,

0. 892 ) and ( G1(150), G2(0), G3(-0. 847 )) = (0.999, 0.04 1, 0.00 2), respectively, leading to 𝐷 !"#$ = 0. 391 for the 

former and 𝐷 !"#$ = 0 .002 for the latter. Thus, neither seems paradigm shifting.  

> 17

The explanation offered by Funk and Owen -Smith (2017) for an apparent lack of disruptiveness is that “… a 

single patent did not cover the advent of digital photography …” (p. 799). 35 

Verhoeven et al. (2016) discuss both 3D printing and a “lab on a chip” as examples of patents that 

are both famous and reasonably novel. A key invention in the former was an apparatus for production 

of three -dimensional objects by stereolithography (US4575330). For this patent, w e find that ( G1(22), 

G2(186), G3(0.2 41 )) = (0.99 2, 0.9 47, 0. 878 ), and that 𝐷 !"#$ = 0. 878 , suggesting that the discovery can 

be considered paradigm shifting if the relative criterion is used, but not quite if the strict er absolute 

criterion is used . The latter “lab on a chip” example refers to an invention in microfluidic manipulations 

(US5858195) used to separate, e.g., amino acids, peptides, and proteins in a way that made bio -chemical 

researchers 10 –100 times faster on 100 –10,000 times smaller samp les. For this patent, we obtain ( G1(4 4), 

G2(68), G3(-0.03 0)) = (0.99 9, 0.5 66 , 0.1 28 ), giving 𝐷 !"#$ = 0.13. Thus, despite its unusually high im-

pact, the discovery seems not to be paradigm shifting .

Case of pharmaceutical patents : The Evergreen pharmaceutical patents dataset offers a distinc-

tion between “original ” patents , protecting novel drug s, and “supplementary ” patents , linked to novel 

drug s but aiming to extend initial intellectual property right s of original patent s. The literature on ever-

green patents (e.g., Feldman, 2018) depart s from the notion that supplementary patents, not belonging 

to the initial intellectual property rights pool associated original patents , tend to be technical in nature 

and aim at extend ing the original patents’ protection . This distinction suggests that the original patents 

ought to have greater impact, to be more novel and potentially also to be more disruptive - and, by 

extension, thus have more paradigm shifting features - than those used to extend the protection of a 

drug. 

Starting with a dataset of 1,346 drugs included into the Orange Book (Durvasula et al., 2023) and 

their patents , we derive an estimation sample that consists of original and supplementary patents pro-

tecting th e drugs (see Appendix D for details of the data ). Using th e resulting sample and a dependent 

variable indicat ing an original patent within a drug (= 1; a supplementary patent = 0), we can analyze 

whether 𝐷 !"#$ helps in distinguishing between the two types of drug patents. In a Logit regression, the 

coefficient for 𝐷 !"#$ is positive and highly statistically significant , implying a marginal effect of 0.15 

(p -value < 0.01) ; we obtain similar results with a Linear Probability Model. While the difference 36 

between original and supplementary patents does not imply that the former are paradigm shifting, this 

additional empirical finding demonstrat es the predictive and discriminatory power of 𝐷 !"#$ .

Summary: Taken together, our analysis of long -term citations, examples of significant patents 

and pharmaceutical patents suggest that the proposed 𝐷 !"#$ measure works as intended. Specifically, i t

provides a transparent way of analyzing why some discoveries are, or are not, likely to be paradigm 

shifting. 

4.5. Analyzing industry -specific trends using 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 

Using several large datasets and 𝐷 !_)* (the CD index) as their main measure, Park et al. (2023) 

analyze how the disruptiveness research papers and patents has evolved over time. They focus on the 

temporal development of the average values 𝐷 !_)* in different industries, reporting that, over time , re-

search papers and patents have become less disruptive, i.e., less likely to break with the past. Even 

though the recent analyses of Macher et al. (2024) and Holst et al. (2024) cast doubt on the validity of 

this finding, it is of interest to ask how the tendency of patents to be paradigm shifting has evolved over 

time by industry . To this end, we apply 𝐷 !"#$ to the percentages of each NBER industry’s cumulative 

distributions , which allows us to explore , by industry, how 𝐷 !"#$ develop s over time. Figure 6 displays 

our key results . Besides the average value of 𝐷 !"#$ (Panel A), we display the share of patents for which 

𝐷 !"#$ > 0.90 each year (Panel B), the value of 90 th percentile of 𝐷 !"#$ by year (Panel C), and the share 

of patents for which 𝐷 !"#$ < 0.30 (Panel D). The graphs display the annually calculated values of the 

measures for the full years from 1982 to 2014 and then for the first part of 2015. 

Panels A –D in Figure 6 suggest the following: First, looking at Panel A, we find a steady down-

ward trend in the annual means of 𝐷 !"#$ in each NBER industry. Panel B focuses on the right tail of 

𝐷 !"#$ (𝐷 !"#$ > 0.90 in each year ), which arguably better identifies paradigm shifting patents per indus-

try , each year . This criterion implies that we only look at the patents whose impact, novelty and disrup-

tiveness belong at least to their respective 90 th percentiles , as calculated for each industry over period 

1982/01 -2015/06. We see a downward trend in the share of such patents. Panel C shows the value of the 

90 th percentile of 𝐷 !"#$ , calculated separately for each year. It also shows that there is a downward trend 37 

in each NBER industry. Finally, Panel D shows that the share of patents with a low absolute value of 

𝐷 !"#$ (< 0.3). Th e share of such patents has grown over time .

Because there is ongoing controversy in how backward citations and changes in patent laws 

should and could be accounted for (Holst et al., 2024; Macher et al., 2024) , we refrain from making 

strong conclusions based on these findings. Taken at face value, they suggest that the tendency of pa-

tented discoveries to be paradigm shifting is in decline. In addition to measurement issues, t hese indus-

try -specific trends may mirror technological regimes, which Corrocher et al. (2021) found to affect 

catching -up and leadership change in green technologies. Future research could explore the connections 

between technological regimes and the emergence of paradigm shifting discoveries across industries. 

Figure 6, Panel A : 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 over time , average. 38 

Figure 6, Panel B: 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 over time , absolute v alue ³ 0.90 .

Figure 6, Panel C: 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 over time , the value of the 90 th percentile of 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 39 

Figure 6, Panel D: 𝑫 𝑭𝑳𝑬𝑿 over time , absolute v alue £ 0.30 .

5. DISCUSSION 

5.1 Limitations 

A primary limitation of our empirical analysis is that we rely on patent data and use largely, but 

not solely, forward citations. To start with , using forward citation s as inputs means that we cannot use 

𝐷 !"#$ to identify paradigm shifting technologies in real time or ex ante. A buffer period of five years is 

required to accumulate such citations , causing a lag before 𝐷 !"#$ , as used here, can be applied. However, 

for the purposes of understanding questions of whether there is more paradigm shifting going on in some 

industries than in others, or how paradigm shifting has developed over time, measures that make use of 

properties of forward citations are useful. Even for this purpose, there are limitations. For example, as 

Macher et al. (2024) point out, in the early years of the observation window, the calculation of the CD 

index may be affected by truncation bias that may distort its calculation . Moreover, patent data is un-

likely to capture the entire spectrum of technological advance , given that not all significant inventions 

are patented. The variability in patenting practices across different regions and fields could subtly influ-

ence what 𝐷 !"#$ can quantify (our application solely uses USPTO data) . This limits the generalizability 

of our findings. 

Additionally, a notable limitation is our inability to broadly validat e 𝐷 !"#$ because of the lack of 

data on paradigm shifting discoveries . Whereas we believe that our use of NIHF patents for the purpose 40 

of calibration is well motivated, t he lack of validation data makes it difficult to thoroughly assess the 

accuracy of the proposed metric. Examining the relation between 𝐷 !"#$ and other indicators of revolu-

tionary research could help in validating how well 𝐷 !"#$ works in different contexts . Such an analysis 

would also allow a better understanding of how the measure manages (or fails ) to capture key theoretical 

constructs (Leibel & Bornmann, 2023; Wei et al., 2023) .

Furthermore, it is not entirely clear which dimensions one should consider important for paradigm 

shifting discoveries. Whereas there are clear theoretical and empirical reasons to consider the discover-

ies’ impact, novelty, and tendency to break with the past, t his approach might miss other critical aspects ,

e.g., economic value. Such a need to have additional dimensions can be considered as an extension 

possibility, to which we turn next .

5.2 Extension possibilities 

There are several ways one could extend 𝐷 !"#$ or tailor it for specific research question s. We can 

envisage , for example , the following: 

Additional dimensions : A straightforward way to extend the measure is to add new dimensions ,

over which the generalized mean is calculated. Letting 𝑆 be the number of dimensions, we can write 

𝐷 !"#$ as 

𝐷 !"#$ = X∑ 𝛼 @𝐺 @(𝑥 @)>*

> @A?
> &

, (7) 

where (𝛼 ?, . . . , 𝛼 *, 𝜎 ) are the parameters. This measure is flexible because the dimensions and their 

count, 𝑆 , can depend on the context and the research question. Irrespectively of the original scale of 𝑥 @,

using the percentage of the cumulative of distributions ensures that the unit of measurement of all in-

cluded dimensions is the same. Moreover, using the percentage of the cumulative distribution allows 

considering their tail features. In this way, the me asure could be extended to include new dimensions, 

such as depth and breadth of Bu et al. (2021) , or non -technological aspects, such as discoveries’ licens-

ing revenues or market value. 

Complementary vs. substitutable dimensions : Wh ereas we have argued that there are theoret-

ical and empirical reasons to think that the impact, novelty, and break ing with the past are strongly 

complementary when paradigm shifting discoveries are considered , there can be research contexts in 41 

which the included dimensions are better viewed as substitutes. This suggests that σ should take on a

positive value . Specifically , i ncreasingly larger positive values of σ give more emphasis to a discovery’s 

most prominent dimension. Alternatively, the parameter can be calibrated or estimated using suitable 

context -specific data. Finding appropriate parameterization s of 𝐷 !"#$ for specific research purposes 

presents opportunit ies for future research .

Weighting of the dimensions : At times, there may be strong theoretical (a priori ) reason s to 

weigh some of the dimensions, xs, more than others. This can be achieved by varying the values of 

(𝛼 ?, . . . , 𝛼 *). When done transparently, this flexibility is a strength of the measure, allowing it to be 

tailored for the context. 

5.3 Implications 

Patent s and scholarly publications contain information about whether and how science and tech-

nology advance s. Being able to utilize that information matters both for managerial decisions and cor-

porate strategy as well as for policy . For example, citation -based analyses of technologies can inform 

policy by enabling the identification of emerging key technologies (Huang et al., 2022) , by helping to 

assess impacts of policies and regulation (Lin et al., 2021) , by helping to evaluate the overall effective-

ness of the patent system (Kwon, 2021) , and by identifying and supporting active collaboration within 

the triple helix (Liu et al., 2023) . Being able to measure the tendency of discoveries to be paradigm 

shifting provides insights on the evolution of industries and markets and is thus useful for firms and 

their management (see, e.g., Nelson & Winter, 1982; Sosa, 2011; Tushman & Anderson, 1986) . Yet, 

lacking solid quantitative measures for paradigm shifting discoveries has been a persistent policy prob-

lem (Nagy et al., 2016) , inhibiting both firms’ and policymakers’ ability to understand what is happening 

and to plan for the future. 

Being able to identify potential paradigm shifting discoveries to inform policy questions require s

that they can be identified and that their measurement can be adjusted to specific policy question s at 

hand. Transparent measurement build s trust and credibility in the assessment of scientific and techno-

logical advance and thereby enhance s the abilit y of policymakers and stakeholders to make informed 

decisions . For example, t o study what types of organizations, research milieus, and teams or which 

geographica l locations are likely to produce paradigm shifting discoveries, one first needs a measure 42 

that can quantify the phenomenon of interest in a flexible way. Seen from this perspective, the proposed 

measure contribut es to science of science and technology policy (Marburger et al., 2011; Powell et al., 

2012) .

6. CONCLUSIONS 

Theory and empirics of economic growth show that longer -term improvements in human well -

being are almost single -handedly driven by nurturing and applying new ideas. Whereas incrementally 

better new ideas and diffusion of old ideas are undoubtedly important, the role of paradigm shifting 

discoveries in the longer -term progress of humankind can hardly be overstated. Against this backdrop, 

it is indeed vital also to think how p aradigm shifting technologies can be identified. In this study, we 

argue that paradi gm shifting technologies (i) have a disproportionate impact on future technologies, (ii) 

are novel, and (iii) tend to induce a break in scientific and technological progress. Based on this insight, 

we incorporate these dimensions into a single, coherent measure and documented that these dimensions 

are strictly complementary .43 

> REFERENCES

Adner, R. (2002). When are technologies disruptive? a demand -based view of the emergence 

of competition. Strategic Management Journal , 23 (8), 667 -688. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.246 

Ahmadpoor, M., & Jones, B. F. (2019). Decoding team and individual impact in science and 

invention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 (28), 13885 -13890. 

https://doi.org/doi:10.1073/pnas.1812341116 

Arthur, W. B. (2007). The structure of invention. Research Policy , 36 (2), 274 -287. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2006.11.005 

Arthur, W. B. (2009). The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves . Free Press. 

https://books.google.fi/books?id=3qHs -XYXN0EC 

Arts, S., Hou, J., & Gomez, J. C. (2021). Natural language processing to identify the creation 

and impact of new technologies in patent text: Code, data, and new measures. 

Research Policy , 50 (2), 104144. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104144 

Arts, S., & Veugelers, R. (2014). Technology familiarity, recombinant novelty, and 

breakthrough invention. Industrial and Corporate Change , 24 (6), 1215 -1246. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtu029 

Atkinson, A. B. (1970). On the measurement of inequality. Journal of Economic Theory , 2(3), 

244 -263. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0022 -0531(70)90039 -6

Augsdorfer, P. (2005). Bootlegging and path dependency. Research Policy , 34 (1), 1 -11. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2004.09.010 

Barnholt, E. W. (1997). Fostering Business Growth with Breakthrough Innovation. Research -

Technology Management , 40 (2), 12 -16. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.1997.11671112 

Bloom, N., Hassan, T. A., Kalyani, A., Lerner, J., & Tahoun, A. (2021). The Diffusion of 

Disruptive Technologies. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 

Series , No. 28999 . https://doi.org/10.3386/w28999 

Bloom, N., Schankerman, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2013). Identifying Technology Spillovers 

and Product Market Rivalry. Econometrica , 81 (4), 1347 -1393. 

https://doi.org/10.3982/ecta9466 

Bornmann, L. (2012). Measuring the societal impact of research. EMBO reports , 13 (8), 673 -

676. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.99 

Bornmann, L. (2016). How much does the expected number of citations for a publication 

change if it contains the address of a specific scientific institute? A new approach for 

the analysis of citation data on the institutional level based on regression mode ls. 

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 67 (9), 2274 -2282. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23546 

Bornmann, L., Devarakonda, S., Tekles, A., & Chacko, G. (2020). Are disruption index 

indicators convergently valid? The comparison of several indicator variants with 

assessments by peers. Quantitative Science Studies , 1(3), 1242 -1259. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00068 

Bornmann, L., & Williams, R. (2020). An evaluation of percentile measures of citation 

impact, and a proposal for making them better. Scientometrics , 124 (2), 1457 -1478. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -020 -03512 -744 

Bresnahan, T. F. (2012). Generality, Recombination, and Reuse. In J. Lerner & S. Stern (Eds.), 

The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited (pp. 611 -662). University of 

Chicago Press. https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226473062.003.0019 

Brueton, V. C., Vale, C. L., Choodari -Oskooei, B., Jinks, R., & Tierney, J. F. (2014). 

Measuring the impact of methodological research: a framework and methods to 

identify evidence of impact. Trials , 15 (1), 464. https://doi.org/10.1186/1745 -6215 -15 -

464 

Brusoni, S., Henkel, J., Jacobides, M. G., Karim, S., MacCormack, A., Puranam, P., & 

Schilling, M. (2023). The power of modularity today: 20 years of “Design Rules”. 

Industrial and Corporate Change , 32 (1), 1 -10. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtac054 

Bu, Y., Waltman, L., & Huang, Y. (2021). A multidimensional framework for characterizing 

the citation impact of scientific publications. Quantitative Science Studies , 2(1), 155 -

183. https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00109 

Bullen, P. S. (2003). Handbook of Means and Their Inequalities . Springer Dordrecht. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94 -017 -0399 -4

Capponi, G., Martinelli, A., & Nuvolari, A. (2022). Breakthrough innovations and where to 

find them. Research Policy , 51 (1), 104376. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104376 

Carvalho, L. S., & Soares, R. R. (2016). Living on the edge: Youth entry, career and exit in 

drug -selling gangs. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 121 , 77 -98. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2015.10.018 

Chen, J., Shao, D., & Fan, S. (2021). Destabilization and consolidation: Conceptualizing, 

measuring, and validating the dual characteristics of technology. Research Policy ,

50 (1), 104115. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104115 

Christensen, C. M. (1997). The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great 

Firms to Fail . Harvard Business School Press. 

https://claytonchristensen.com/books/the -innovators -dilemma/ 

Christensen, C. M., Johnson, M. W., & Rigby, D. K. (2002). Foundations for growth: How to 

identify and build disruptive new businesses. MIT Sloan Management Review , 43 (3), 

22 -31. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/foundations -for -growth -how -to -identify -

and -build -disruptive -new -businesses/ 

Christensen, C. M., McDonald, R., Altman, E. J., & Palmer, J. E. (2018). Disruptive 

Innovation: An Intellectual History and Directions for Future Research. Journal of 

Management Studies , 55 (7), 1043 -1078. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12349 

Christensen, C. M., Raynor, M., & McDonald, R. (2015). What is Disruptive Innovation? 

Harvard Business Review , 93 (12), 44 -53. https://hbr.org/2015/12/what -is -disruptive -

innovation 

Coccia, M. (2017). Sources of technological innovation: Radical and incremental innovation 

problem -driven to support competitive advantage of firms. Technology Analysis & 

Strategic Management , 29 (9), 1048 -1061. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2016.1268682 

Corrocher, N., Malerba, F., & Morrison, A. (2021). Technological regimes, patent growth, and 

catching -up in green technologies. Industrial and Corporate Change , 30 (4), 1084 -

1107. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtab025 

Cozzolino, A., Verona, G., & Rothaermel, F. T. (2018). Unpacking the Disruption Process: 

New Technology, Business Models, and Incumbent Adaptation. Journal of 

Management Studies , 55 (7), 1166 -1202. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12352 45 

Dahlin, K. B., & Behrens, D. M. (2005). When is an invention really radical?: Defining and 

measuring technological radicalness. Research Policy , 34 (5), 717 -737. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.03.009 

Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: A suggested 

interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change. Research Policy ,

11 (3), 147 -162. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0048 -7333(82)90016 -6

Durvasula, M., Hemphill, C. S., Ouellette, L. L., Sampat, B., & Williams, H. L. (2023). The 

NBER Orange Book Dataset: A user’s guide. Research Policy , 52 (7), 104791. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104791 

Feldman, R. (2018). May your drug price be evergreen. Journal of Law and the Biosciences ,

5(3), 590 -647. https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsy022 

Felin, T., & Kauffman, S. (2023). Disruptive evolution: harnessing functional excess, 

experimentation, and science as tool. Industrial and Corporate Change , 32 (6), 1372 -

1392. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtad057 

Fleming, L. (2007). Breakthroughs and the "Long Tail" of Innovation. MIT Sloan 

Management Review , 49 (1), 69 -74. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/breakthroughs -

and -the -long -tail -of -innovation/ 

Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2001). Technology as a complex adaptive system: evidence 

from patent data. Research Policy , 30 (7), 1019 -1039. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048 -

7333(00)00135 -9

Foster, J., Greer, J., & Thorbecke, E. (1984). A Class of Decomposable Poverty Measures. 

Econometrica , 52 (3), 761 -766. https://doi.org/10.2307/1913475 

Foster, J. G., Rzhetsky, A., & Evans, J. A. (2015). Tradition and Innovation in Scientists’ 

Research Strategies. American Sociological Review , 80 (5), 875 -908. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122415601618 

Funk, R. J., & Owen -Smith, J. (2017). A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological 

Change. Management Science , 63 (3), 791 -817. 

https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2366 

Gebhart, T., & Funk, R. J. (2023). A Mathematical Framework for Citation Disruption. ArXiv ,

2308.16363 ([v1] Wed, 30 Aug 2023 23:34:47 UTC). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.16363 

Gerken, J. M., & Moehrle, M. G. (2012). A new instrument for technology monitoring: 

novelty in patents measured by semantic patent analysis. Scientometrics , 91 (3), 645 -

670. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -012 -0635 -7

Haley, M. R. (2019). An EigenFactor -weighted power mean generalization of the Euclidean 

Index. PLoS ONE , 14 (2), e0212760. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212760 

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The NBER Patent Citation Data File: 

Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. National Bureau of Economic Research 

Working Papers , 8498 . https://doi.org/10.3386/w8498 

Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. M., & Vopel, K. (1999). Citation Frequency and the Value 

of Patented Inventions. The Review of Economics and Statistics , 81 (3), 511 -515. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/003465399558265 

Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M., & Vopel, K. (2003). Citations, family size, opposition and the 

value of patent rights. Research Policy , 32 (8), 1343 -1363. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048 -7333(02)00124 -5

Higham, K., de Rassenfosse, G., & Jaffe, A. B. (2021). Patent Quality: Towards a Systematic 

Framework for Analysis and Measurement. Research Policy , 50 (4), 104215. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104215 

Holst, V., Algaba, A., Tori, F., Wenmackers, S., & Ginis, V. (2024). Dataset Artefacts are the 

Hidden Drivers of the Declining Disruptiveness in Science. ArXiv , 2402.14583 ([v1] 46 

Wed, 7 Feb 2024 16:33:32 UTC). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.14583 

Hopp, C., Antons, D., Kaminski, J., & Oliver Salge, T. (2018). Disruptive Innovation: 

Conceptual Foundations, Empirical Evidence, and Research Opportunities in the 

Digital Age. Journal of Product Innovation Management , 35 (3), 446 -457. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12448 

Hopster, J. (2021). What are socially disruptive technologies? Technology in Society , 67 ,

101750. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101750 

Hsieh, D. A., Manski, C. F., & McFadden, D. (1985). Estimation of Response Probabilities 

from Augmented Retrospective Observations. Journal of the American Statistical 

Association , 80 (391), 651 -662. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1985.10478165 

Huang, Y., Li, R., Zou, F., Jiang, L., Porter, A. L., & Zhang, L. (2022). Technology life cycle 

analysis: From the dynamic perspective of patent citation networks. Technological 

Forecasting and Social Change , 181 , 121760. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121760 

Imbens, G. W. (1992). An Efficient Method of Moments Estimator for Discrete Choice 

Models With Choice -Based Sampling. Econometrica , 60 (5), 1187 -1214. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/2951544 

Imbens, G. W., & Lancaster, T. (1996). Efficient estimation and stratified sampling. Journal of 

Econometrics , 74 (2), 289 -318. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0304 -

4076(95)01756 -9

Kaplan, S., & Vakili, K. (2015). The double -edged sword of recombination in breakthrough 

innovation. Strategic Management Journal , 36 (10), 1435 -1457. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2294 

Keating, K. A., & Cherry, S. (2004). Use and Interpretation of Logistic Regression in Habitat -

Selection Studies. Journal of Wildlife Management , 68 (4), 774 -789, 716. 

https://doi.org/10.2193/0022 -541X(2004)068[0774:UAIOLR]2.0.CO;2 

Kelly, B., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., & Taddy, M. (2021). Measuring Technological 

Innovation over the Long Run. American Economic Review: Insights , 3(3), 303 -320. 

https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20190499 

Kim, J., Park, Y., & Lee, Y. (2016). A visual scanning of potential disruptive signals for 

technology roadmapping: investigating keyword cluster, intensity, and relationship in 

futuristic data. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , 28 (10), 1225 -1246. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2016.1193593 

King, G., & Zeng, L. (2001). Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data. Political Analysis ,

9(2), 137 -163. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.pan.a004868 

Kivimaa, P., Laakso, S., Lonkila, A., & Kaljonen, M. (2021). Moving beyond disruptive 

innovation: A review of disruption in sustainability transitions. Environmental 

innovation and societal transitions , 38 , 110 -126. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2020.12.001 

Kline, P., Petkova, N., Williams, H., & Zidar, O. (2019). Who Profits from Patents? Rent -

Sharing at Innovative Firms*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 134 (3), 1343 -

1404. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz011 

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., & Stoffman, N. (2017). Technological Innovation, 

Resource Allocation, and Growth*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 132 (2), 665 -

712. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw040 

Kuhn, J., Younge, K., & Marco, A. (2020). Patent citations reexamined. The RAND Journal of 

Economics , 51 (1), 109 -132. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/1756 -2171.12307 47 

Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions: 50th Anniversary Edition (4 ed.). 

The University of Chicago Press. 

https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/S/bo13179781.html 

Kwon, S. (2021). The prevalence of weak patents in the United States: A new method to 

identify weak patents and the implications for patent policy. Technology in Society , 64 ,

101469. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101469 

Laudan, L. (1978). Progress and its problems: Toward a theory of scientific growth .

University of California Press. 

Leahey, E., Lee, J., & Funk, R. J. (2023). What Types of Novelty Are Most Disruptive? 

American Sociological Review , 88 (3), 562 -597. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/00031224231168074 

Lee, K. -H., & Min, B. (2015). Green R&D for eco -innovation and its impact on carbon 

emissions and firm performance. Journal of cleaner production , 108 , 534 -542. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.05.114 

Leibel, C., & Bornmann, L. (2023). What do we know about the disruption index in 

scientometrics? An overview of the literature. Scientometrics , forthcoming (published 

18 November 2023) . https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -023 -04873 -5

Lele, S. R. (2009). A New Method for Estimation of Resource Selection Probability Function. 

The Journal of Wildlife Management , 73 (1), 122 -127. 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/40208496 

Leydesdorff, L., & Bornmann, L. (2021). Disruption indices and their calculation using web -

of -science data: Indicators of historical developments or evolutionary dynamics? 

Journal of Informetrics , 15 (4), 101219. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2021.101219 

Leydesdorff, L., Tekles, A., & Bornmann, L. (2021). A proposal to revise the disruption 

indicator. Profesional de la información , 30 (1). 

https://doi.org/10.3145/epi.2021.ene.21 

Lin, J., Wu, H. -M., & Wu, H. (2021). Could government lead the way? Evaluation of China's 

patent subsidy policy on patent quality. China Economic Review , 69 , 101663. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2021.101663 

Liu, M., Shan, Y., & Li, Y. (2023). Heterogeneous Partners, R&D cooperation and corporate 

innovation capability: Evidence from Chinese manufacturing firms. Technology in 

Society , 72 , 102183. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.102183 

Macher, J. T., Rutzer, C., & Weber, R. (2023). The Illusive Slump of Disruptive Patents. 

ArXiv , 2306.10774v1 . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.10774 

Macher, J. T., Rutzer, C., & Weder, R. (2024). Is there a secular decline in disruptive patents? 

Correcting for measurement bias. Research Policy , 53 (5), 104992. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2024.104992 

Marburger, I. I. I. J. H., Lane, J. I., Shipp, S. S., & Fealing, K. H. (Eds.). (2011). The Science 

of Science Policy: A Handbook . Stanford University Press. 

http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=18746 .

Markides, C. (2006). Disruptive Innovation: In Need of Better Theory*. Journal of Product 

Innovation Management , 23 (1), 19 -25. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540 -

5885.2005.00177.x 

Mascitelli, R. (2000). From Experience: Harnessing Tacit Knowledge to Achieve 

Breakthrough Innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management , 17 (3), 179 -

193. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/1540 -5885.1730179 

Nagy, D., Schuessler, J., & Dubinsky, A. (2016). Defining and identifying disruptive 

innovations. Industrial Marketing Management , 57 , 119 -126. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.11.017 48 

Nelson, R. R. (2008). Factors affecting the power of technological paradigms. Industrial and 

Corporate Change , 17 (3), 485 -497. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtn010 

Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1982). The Schumpeterian Tradeoff Revisited [Article]. 

American Economic Review , 72 (1), 114. 

http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bch&AN=4504968&site=eho 

st -live 

O’Connor, G. C., & Veryzer, R. W. (2001). The nature of market visioning for technology -

based radical innovation. The Journal of Product Innovation Management , 18 (4), 231 -

246. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0737 -6782(01)00092 -3

Park, M., Leahey, E., & Funk, R. J. (2023). Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive 

over time. Nature , 613 (7942), 138 -144. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -022 -05543 -x

Patel, P., & Pavitt, K. (1997). The technological competencies of the world's largest firms: 

Complex and path -dependent, but not much variety. Research Policy , 26 (2), 141 -156. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048 -7333(97)00005 -X

Perry, M., & Reny, P. J. (2016). How to Count Citations If You Must. American Economic 

Review , 106 (9), 2722 -2741. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20140850 

Pinkse, J., Bohnsack, R., & Kolk, A. (2014). The Role of Public and Private Protection in 

Disruptive Innovation: The Automotive Industry and the Emergence of Low -Emission 

Vehicles. Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31 (1), 43 -60. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12079 

Powell, W. W., Packalen, K., Whittington, K., Padgett, J. F., & Powell, W. W. (2012). 

Organizational and Institutional Genesis: The Emergence of High -Tech Clusters in the 

Life Sciences. In J. F. Padgett & W. W. Powell (Eds.), The Emergence of 

Organizations and Markets (pp. 434 –465). Princeton University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.23943/princeton/9780691148670.003.0014 

Righi, C., & Simcoe, T. (2019). Patent examiner specialization. Research Policy , 48 (1), 137 -

148. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.08.003 

Rosenfeld, B. (2017). Reevaluating the Middle -Class Protest Paradigm: A Case -Control Study 

of Democratic Protest Coalitions in Russia. American Political Science Review ,

111 (4), 637 -652. https://doi.org/10.1017/S000305541700034X 

Rosenkopf, L., & Nerkar, A. (2001). Beyond local search: boundary -spanning, exploration, 

and impact in the optical disk industry. Strategic Management Journal , 22 (4), 287 -

306. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.160 

Rota, C. T., Millspaugh, J. J., Kesler, D. C., Lehman, C. P., Rumble, M. A., & Jachowski, C. 

M. B. (2013). A re -evaluation of a case –control model with contaminated controls for 

resource selection studies. Journal of Animal Ecology , 82 (6), 1165 -1173. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/1365 -2656.12092 

Scherer, F. M., & Harhoff, D. (2000). Technology Policy for a World of Skew -Distributed 

Outcomes. Research Policy , 29 ( 4 –5), 559 -566. 

https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0048 -7333(99)00089 -X

Schmidt, G. M., & Druehl, C. T. (2008). When Is a Disruptive Innovation Disruptive? Journal 

of Product Innovation Management , 25 (4), 347 -369. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540 -5885.2008.00306.x 

Searles, A., Doran, C., Attia, J., Knight, D., Wiggers, J., Deeming, S., Mattes, J., Webb, B., 

Hannan, S., Ling, R., Edmunds, K., Reeves, P., & Nilsson, M. (2016). An approach to 

measuring and encouraging research translation and research impact. Health Research 

Policy and Systems , 14 (1), 60. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12961 -016 -0131 -2

Sheng, L., Lyu, D., Ruan, X., Shen, H., & Cheng, Y. (2023). The association between prior 

knowledge and the disruption of an article. Scientometrics , 128 (8), 4731 -4751. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -023 -04751 -049 

Sosa, M. L. (2011). From Old Competence Destruction to New Competence Access: Evidence 

from the Comparison of Two Discontinuities in Anticancer Drug Discovery. 

Organization Science , 22 (6), 1500 -1516. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0616 

Steinberg, D., & Cardell, N. S. (1992). Estimating logistic regression models when the 

dependent variable has no variance. Communications in Statistics - Theory and 

Methods , 21 (2), 423 -450. https://doi.org/10.1080/03610929208830787 

Strumsky, D., & Lobo, J. (2015). Identifying the sources of technological novelty in the 

process of invention. Research Policy , 44 (8), 1445 -1461. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.05.008 

Sturgeon, T. J. (2002). Modular production networks: a new American model of industrial 

organization. Industrial and Corporate Change , 11 (3), 451 -496. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/11.3.451 

Tushman, M. L., & Anderson, P. (1986). Technological Discontinuities and Organizational 

Environments. Administrative Science Quarterly , 31 , 439 –465. 

Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M., & Jones, B. (2013). Atypical Combinations and 

Scientific Impact. Science , 342 (6157), 468 -472. 

https://doi.org/doi:10.1126/science.1240474 

Verhoeven, D., Bakker, J., & Veugelers, R. (2016). Measuring technological novelty with 

patent -based indicators. Research Policy , 45 (3), 707 -723. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.11.010 

von Tunzelmann, N., Malerba, F., Nightingale, P., & Metcalfe, S. (2008). Technological 

paradigms: past, present and future. Industrial and Corporate Change , 17 (3), 467 -484. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtn012 

Wang, S., Ma, Y., Mao, J., Bai, Y., Liang, Z., & Li, G. (2023). Quantifying scientific 

breakthroughs by a novel disruption indicator based on knowledge entities. Journal of 

the Association for Information Science and Technology , 74 (2), 150 -167. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24719 

Wei, C., Li, J., & Shi, D. (2023). Quantifying revolutionary discoveries: Evidence from Nobel 

prize -winning papers. Information Processing & Management , 60 (3), 103252. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2022.103252 

Weitzman, M. L. (1998). Recombinant Growth*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ,

113 (2), 331 -360. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555595 

Whitley, R. (2000). The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences (2 ed.). Oxford 

University Press. 

Wilson, C., & Tyfield, D. (2018). Critical perspectives on disruptive innovation and energy 

transformation. Energy Research & Social Science , 37 , 211 -215. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.10.032 

Wu, L., Wang, D., & Evans, J. A. (2019). Large teams develop and small teams disrupt 

science and technology. Nature , 566 (7744), 378 -382. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -

019 -0941 -9

Wuestman, M., Hoekman, J., & Frenken, K. (2020). A typology of scientific breakthroughs. 

Quantitative Science Studies , 1(3), 1203 -1222. https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00079 

Yaqub, O. (2017). Variation in the dynamics and performance of industrial innovation: What 

can we learn from vaccines and HIV vaccines? Industrial and Corporate Change ,

27 (3), 619 -619. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtx024 

Yoon, B., & Park, Y. (2005). A systematic approach for identifying technology opportunities: 

Keyword -based morphology analysis. Technological Forecasting and Social Change ,

72 (2), 145 -160. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2004.08.011