Title: Bridging Distant Ideas: the Impact of AI on R&D and Recombinant Innovation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02189v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:18:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Bridging Distant Ideas: the Impact of AI on R&D and Recombinant Innovation 

## Emanuele Bazzichi 1, Massimo Riccaboni 1,2 and Fulvio Castellacci 3

This version: 31st March 2026 

Abstract 

We study how artificial intelligence (AI) affects firms’ incentives to pursue incremental 

versus radical knowledge recombinations. We develop a model of recombinant inno-vation embedded in a Schumpeterian quality-ladder framework, in which innovation arises from recombining ideas across varying distances in a knowledge space. R&D con-sists of multiple tasks, a fraction of which can be performed by AI. AI facilitates access to distant knowledge domains, but at the same time it also increases the aggregate rate of creative destruction, shortening the monopoly duration that rewards radical inno-vations. Moreover, excessive reliance on AI may reduce the originality of research and lead to duplication of research efforts. We obtain three main results. First, higher AI productivity encourages more distant recombinations, if the direct facilitation effect is stronger than the indirect effect due to intensified competition from rivals. Sec-ond, the effect of increasing the share of AI-automated R&D tasks is non-monotonic: firms initially target more radical innovations, but beyond a threshold of human-AI complementarity, they shift the focus toward incremental innovations. Third, in the limiting case of full automation, the model predicts that optimal recombination dis-tance collapses to zero, suggesting that fully AI-driven research would undermine the very knowledge creation that it seeks to accelerate. 

JEL Classification : 031, 041 

Keywords : Recombinant Innovation; Artificial Intelligence; Creative Destruction  

> 1

IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca, Lucca, Italy.  

> 2

IUSS, University School for Advanced Studies of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.  

> 3

TIK Centre, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 

> arXiv:2604.02189v1 [econ.TH] 2 Apr 2026

# 1 Introduction 

New ideas are produced through the recombination of already existing knowledge in a cu-mulative and combinatorial process (Weitzman, 1998). Existing ideas can be seen as seeds to be cross-pollinated to create new varieties of knowledge, which are in turn added to the existing stock and used for future combinations. An illustrative example can be found in Edison’s writings, where he described how the idea of a domestic electric lighting network came to his mind by combining his own invention of the “electric candle” (the early name of the light bulb) with the gas distribution system (Weitzman, 1998). Progress is sometimes the outcome of combining ideas from very different scientific fields. When the Hubble Space Telescope was launched in 1990, its images were blurred due to a spherical aberration in the primary mirror. Scientists applied deconvolution algorithms to reduce noise in the tele-scope’s images, and the operation was so successful that these algorithms were later adopted in medicine, where they saved many lives (Bonaventura et al., 2022). Knowledge production is thus a combinatorial process – it arises from bridging ideas across different fields – and a cumulative one, since each new idea enlarges the stock available for future recombinations. The vast majority of possible idea combinations will not produce fruitful innovations, and a central task of scientific and R&D work is to identify the most promising ones. Over the past decade, artificial intelligence (AI) has been increasingly integrated into scientific activity, assisting researchers in processing large datasets, generating hypotheses, design-ing experiments and accelerating experimentation (Wang et al., 2023). AI-based predictive models help scientists navigate the vast search space of possible combinations, prioritizing candidates with the highest expected returns and reducing both costs and search duration (Agrawal et al., 2023, 2024). Active learning algorithms and Bayesian optimization tech-niques support the generation of new hypotheses consistent with empirical evidence (Wang et al., 2023), and Large Language Models have shown potential for theory building and in silico experimentation (Tranchero et al., 2024). In these ways, AI provides researchers with tools to combine ideas from different scientific fields, supplying knowledge outside their core domain of expertise, integrating and processing datasets, and automating routine research tasks. These developments have spurred a growing theoretical literature studying the impact of AI on the rate and direction of innovation. Gans (2025a) proposes a general equilibrium model where AI enhances research by interpolating between existing knowledge points, and shows that AI’s effect on research novelty depends on a critical threshold in its capabil-ities: modest AI encourages incremental research that increases knowledge density, while extensive AI promotes exploratory research that reduces it. Gans (2025b) distinguishes be-tween AI applied in research (scientist-AI) and AI applied in downstream decision-making (decision-maker-AI), and shows that while scientist-AI predictably encourages knowledge consolidation within established domains, decision-maker-AI has a non-monotonic effect on research novelty: scientists ignore it when its capabilities are limited, constrain their ambi-tion to match it at moderate capability levels, and pursue more novel research only when AI capabilities are sufficiently advanced. More broadly, AI has been characterized as an “invention in the methods of inventing ” – a General Purpose Technology that is reshaping how research is conducted (Venturini, 2022; Bianchini et al., 2022; Besiroglu et al., 2024) – and formal models have studied its implications for long-run growth and the idea production function (Aghion et al., 2017; Almeida et al., 2024; Jones, 2025). Yet, a crucial dimension has been largely absent from this recent literature: the role of competitive dynamics and creative destruction. When AI empowers one firm to attempt 2more ambitious recombinations, it simultaneously empowers that firm’s competitors, accel-erating the rate at which innovation monopolies are displaced. Whether AI ultimately steers research toward radical or incremental innovation depends not only on its direct effect on each firm’s research capability, but also on how it reshapes the competitive environment in which firms operate. This is the central question of our paper. We seek to investigate how AI affects firms’ incentives to pursue short-distance (incremental) versus long-distance (rad-ical) knowledge recombinations, once we account for the competitive dynamics of creative destruction. This question becomes all the more relevant in the light of emerging empirical evidence pointing to important limitations and potential negative effects of AI in scientific research. Toner-Rodgers (2024) finds that the benefits of AI in materials science are strongly heteroge-neous, with substantial gains concentrated among scientists with good judgment capabilities, while others struggle to assess the quality of AI-generated suggestions. In pharmaceutical R&D, AI accelerates drug discovery but the effect is strongest for drugs with medium levels of novelty and for firms with deep domain knowledge that can filter out false positives (Lou and Wu, 2021; Tranchero, 2024). More broadly, there is growing concern that AI-assisted research may exhibit a tendency to concentrate on well-explored knowledge domains where data is abundant and AI systems perform best – the so-called streetlight effect (Tranchero et al., 2024; Toner-Rodgers, 2024) – and that different researchers using similar AI tools may converge on the same ideas, producing duplication of research effort – the stepping-on-toes effect (Almeida et al., 2024). These recent findings suggest that the relationship between AI adoption and research novelty may be more complex than simple productivity-enhancing accounts would imply. In this paper, we address these issues by developing a model of recombinant innovation embedded in a Schumpeterian quality-ladder framework. Ideas are located in a knowledge space – a graph structure where distances capture the cognitive dissimilarity between fields. R&D firms choose how far to reach across this space when attempting to combine ideas, facing a fundamental trade-off: distant recombinations are riskier but, conditional on success, they lead to more radical and more profitable innovations, while close recombinations are easier to develop but produce only incremental advances. Research is modeled using a task-based production function in which a fraction of tasks can be performed by AI, while the other tasks require human researchers. Innovation arrives as a Poisson process with an arrival rate that decreases with recombinant distance, and each successful innovation grants the innovator a temporary monopoly until displaced by the next one. AI enters this framework through four channels, two positive and two negative. On the positive side, first, AI increases the probability that a given recombination attempt suc-ceeds, effectively shrinking the distance between ideas and enabling more ambitious research strategies. Second, by facilitating more distant recombinations, AI indirectly expands the frontier of future innovation opportunities: a successful distant recombination creates new intermediate connections in the knowledge space, opening shorter paths between previously unrelated ideas and generating a wave of follow-up innovations – a mechanism analogous to the diffusion effects documented in the General Purpose Technologies literature (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). On the negative side, first, AI also empowers competitors: by rais-ing the aggregate arrival rate of innovations across the economy, it accelerates the rate of creative destruction and it shortens the expected duration of innovation monopolies, thus reducing the expected reward from risky long-distance recombinations. Second, excessive reliance on AI erodes the complementarity between AI and human researchers, as AI-driven research gravitates toward data-rich and well-explored domains (streetlight effect) and dif-3ferent firms using similar AI tools converge on the same research directions (stepping-on-toes effect). The interaction of these four channels generates three main results. First, an increase in AI productivity has an ambiguous net effect on optimal recombination distance: the direct facilitation of distant recombinations is counteracted by intensified competition from AI-empowered rivals, and the net outcome depends on which force dominates, with the direct effect prevailing when AI capabilities are still moderate. Second, the effect of increasing the share of AI-automated research tasks is non-monotonic: at low levels of automation, expanding AI usage encourages more radical recombinations, but beyond a threshold where human-AI complementarity erodes, firms shift their focus toward incremental innovations. Third, in the limiting case of full automation, the model predicts that optimal recombination distance collapses to zero, suggesting that fully AI-driven research would undermine the very knowledge creation it seeks to accelerate. Our paper contributes to the theoretical literature on AI and economic growth in two main ways. First, by embedding the recombination problem into a quality-ladder framework `a la Aghion and Howitt, we capture a channel that is absent from existing analyses of AI, R&D and growth: the competitive dynamics of creative destruction (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Aghion et al., 1998). In the models of Gans (2025a,b) AI affects the individual re-searcher’s or firm’s optimal strategy, but the competitive environment is either absent or plays a secondary role. In our setting, AI simultaneously affects the innovating firm’s own capability and the rate at which all competitors innovate, creating a tension between individ-ual productivity and aggregate displacement that produces richer and comparative statics. Second, our formulation of AI power as a composite index that combines AI productivity, the breadth of AI task coverage and the residual human contribution, provides a tractable representation of AI’s role in research that endogenously generates the non-monotonic re-lationship between AI adoption and innovation novelty. This non-monotonicity arises from the interaction between the streetlight and stepping-on-toes effects noted above, and the resulting loss of human-AI complementarity. These mechanisms that are grounded in the emerging empirical evidence noted above, and are distinct from the threshold effects in Gans (2025a), which arise from the properties of AI’s interpolation range. Additionally, our model embeds ideas in a graph-based knowledge space rather than the real-line representation used in Gans (2025a,b). While the current analysis exploits only the distance dimension of this structure, the graph representation provides a richer conceptual framework that motivates the GPT-effect – whereby a successful distant recombination creates new shorter paths for future innovations – and opens possible directions for future research, e.g. through empirical operationalization using patent citation networks and semantic similarity measures. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the baseline model, introducing the knowledge space, the R&D sector with its task-based production function, the role of AI power, and the firm’s optimal choice of recombination distance. Section 3 extends the model to a quality-ladder framework in which successful innovators earn temporary monopoly rents and face displacement by competitors. Section 4 analyzes the equilibrium properties of the model, establishing the existence and uniqueness of a balanced growth path and deriving comparative statics with respect to AI productivity and the share of AI-automated tasks. Section 5 concludes with a discussion of the results, their policy implications, and directions for future research. 42 The model: Baseline Set Up 

## 2.1 Knowledge Space 

We define knowledge as the ensemble of existing ideas embedded in a graph structure, that represents the knowledge space . Formally, the knowledge space is represented by a graph 

G = ( I, D), where I denotes the set of nodes, each corresponding to an individual idea, and 

D = {dij }i,j ∈I is the set of pairwise distances among ideas. Distances capture the degree of cognitive dissimilarity between ideas: a large distance means that two ideas pertains to very different knowledge domains and they are therefore also more difficult to combine. We can think of the knowledge space as an irregular graph with nodes’ link being weighted by ideas similarity. Knowledge similarity can be measured, for instance, using patent citation data (Chen, 2017) or through text-based analyses of scientific publications that capture semantic similarity across research domains (Gentzkow et al., 2019). In Fig. 1a, we use this representation to illustrate the scientific landscape: nodes rep-resent knowledge fields rather than ideas, and link weights indicate the distance between them. While combining concepts from very different domains is challenging, we argue that successful combinations of ideas from distant fields will result in more radical and higher-value innovations. In particular, a successful combination of distant fields may be able to introduce brand new ideas and new scientific fields. To illustrate, consider the birth of “Econophysics” the inter-disciplinary field where theories and methods from physics have been applied to study economic problems, with particular attention to financial markets (Sharma et al., 2011). In Fig. 1b we show the emergence of a new node in between the fields “Physics” and “Economics”. In our model, the success of a recombination creates new paths that may lead to further combinations in the future. This idea was initially proposed by Weitzman (1998), according to which cross-pollination of ideas create “cultivated varieties” that are, in turn, added to the stock of knowledge and used for future combinations. This idea is also related to the diffusion of General Purpose Technologies (GPTs), in which a major breakthrough discovery (represented by a large distance combination in our model) subsequently opens the ground for a series of more incremental innovations (short distance combinations). In our model, we will therefore refer to this effect as the GPT-effect . Fig. 1b shows in red the links that the new field “Econophysics” creates in the knowledge space. 5(a) Knowledge space  

> (b) Knowledge space with a new bridging field

Figure 1: Knowledge space before (above) and after (below) the introduction of the new “Econophysics” node. Link weights indicates the distance among knowledge fields; red links are the new combination possibilities introduced by the new field. 62.2 R&D Sector 

R&D firms seek to produce new knowledge by combining knowledge and ideas from different fields (recombinant innovation). To do so, they can use both human researchers and AI. AI helps researchers to identify complex patterns, perform routine and repetitive cognitive tasks more efficiently, and provide access to advanced scientific knowledge (and particularly that from distant scientific fields outside of the firm’s core domain of expertise). Each firm considers wage w, AI price μ and the knowledge space as given. To achieve a given recombination, the firm must perform a set of tasks ω ∈ [0 , 1]. Let us denote y(ω) the generic output from a given task, and let us define the total research effort R as: 

R = exp 

Z 10

log y(ω) dω 



. (1) A fraction α ∈ (0 , 1) of tasks can be performed using AI, while labor must be used for the remaining tasks (1 − α). To carry out tasks ω, the firm uses the following inputs: 

y(ω) = 

(

ma (ω) for ω ∈ [0 , α ]

l(ω) for ω ∈ (α, 1] ,

where a(ω) and l(ω) are the quantity of AI and labor used to perform tasks ω, respectively. Labor productivity is fixed to 1, while AI productivity is m > 1. Since within the two blocks, tasks are assumed identical, the inputs may be specified as follows: 

y(ω) = 

(

mXAI  

> α

for ω ∈ [0 , α ] 

> LR
> 1−α

for ω ∈ (α, 1] ,

where XAI and LR are the total AI power and the total number of researchers, respectively, demanded by a given firm. Substituting these inputs into eq. (1) gives: 

R = ( mX AI )αL(1 −α) 

> R

. (2) Our focus is to study the optimal recombinant distance, not the intensive margin of research. Therefore, for simplicity, we fix total research effort R = ¯R = 1. Hence, ¯R represents the effort required to achieve a given recombination. The firm’s optimization problem is to minimize its input costs to achieve a recombinant innovation: min 

> lt,x AI ,t

wtlt + μtxAI ,t 

s.t. ¯R = 1 .

(3) Solving this problem, we get the following expression for the recombinant cost: 

C(wt, μ t) = α−α(1 − α)−(1 −α) w1−αt μαt

mα .

R&D firms purchase the AI that they need from a monopolist that develops AI algorithms. For simplicity, and to keep the model tractable, we do not model the monopolist firm that develops AI. In line with the evidence of increasing AI costs due to infrastructures, cloud rental, energy and staff expenditure (Cottier et al., 2024; Lohn and Musser, 2022), we model the price of AI as an increasing function of the knowledge stock in the economy, as it becomes more costly to train and deploy AI algorithms on an growing amount of data: μt = ¯ μA t.7This assumption allows the existence of a balanced growth path. However, we will later consider further this assumption and simulate different scenarios for the trend of AI price over time. We define p(dij ) the probability that the combination of two ideas i and j at distance 

dij will successfully produce an innovation. Recombinant innovation is characterized by two properties. First, we assume that: 

∂p (dij )

∂d ij 

< 0,

i.e., ideas that are more distant in the knowledge space require more coordination and integration efforts, and they are therefore more difficult to combine and less likely to lead to a recombinant innovation. Second, conditional on success, we posit that recombinations of ideas from distant (close) fields represent more radical (incremental) innovations, and they are therefore associated with higher (lower) payoffs in terms of expected profits for the innovating firm. What is the role of AI for the creation of recombinant innovations? Our model argues that the use of AI in R&D increases the probability that a recombinatory search between two ideas at distance d succeeds, since AI makes it easier to get access to, interpret and apply advanced scientific knowledge that lies outside of the R&D firm’s core expertise: 

p = p(dij , λ AI ),

with ∂p (dij , λ AI )

∂d ij 

< 0, ∂p (dij , λ AI )

∂λ AI > 0,

where λAI is the power of AI in research, that defines the extent to which AI enables recom-binant innovations in R&D firms. This is defined as: 

λAI = mϕακ(1 − α)1−κ. (4) AI power depends on AI productivity m and the fraction of tasks α it can perform. The parameters ϕ, κ ∈ (0 , 1) govern the returns from AI productivity and the intensity of complementarity between AI and human researchers, respectively. Equation (4) points out the existence of an important trade-off related to the use of AI in scientific research. On the one hand, the use of AI in research helps scientists formu-lating new theories and hypotheses, access advanced knowledge from other fields, analyze datasets, run parallel tests and simulations that may avoid risks related to “dead ends” and research failures (Wang et al., 2023; Almeida et al., 2024). All of these tend to increase the productivity of R&D and the probability that distant recombinant innovations are created. On the other hand, however, there are two related effects that may moderate the useful-ness of AI in the R&D process. First, AI may often be a more powerful tool for combination of ideas belonging to well explored areas of knowledge where scientific understanding is al-ready well-established, and where scientists already have large amounts of data and codified knowledge, which the AI itself was trained on; whereas this is less so for combinations be-tween truly unexplored domains. In other words, a strongly automated research process may risk to focus on already saturated and well-established fields. This is the so-called streetlight effect (Tranchero et al., 2024; Toner-Rodgers, 2024). Second, another risk in the use of AI in R&D is that different scientists and firms working on similar topics may get similar sug-gestions by AI. Hence, there may be more duplication of research output in the R&D sector, 8i.e. the so-called stepping-on-toes effect . What these two effects have in common is that an excessive use of AI in research implies a lack of complementarity between AI and human researchers, which leads to a lack of novelty and creativity in the research process. Considering these two moderating effect together, the parameter κ in eq. (4) points out that the lack of originality and novelty following from an over-usage of AI in research may lead to a non-monotone relation between the fraction of tasks that AI performs and its power in R&D. Hence, an increase in the fraction of tasks performed by AI ( α) increases AI power 

λAI until a threshold level α ≤ α∗ = κ, and it decreases it thereafter. 

Optimal Target Distance. R&D firms face a trade-off between targeting riskier long-distance recombinations associated with higher payoff γ(d) and safer short-distance inno-vations with a lower payoff. The firm’s objective is to maximize the net expected payoff (profits) associated with a given recombinatory innovation: max  

> d

p(d, λ AI )γ(d) − C(w, μ ).

Let us now define two simple functional forms for p(d, λ AI ) and γ(d): 

p(d, λ AI ) = exp 

 −βλAI 

d



,γ(d) = dη,

with η ∈ (0 , 1). The first functional form specifies the probability that a recombinant innovation is found as a negative exponential in distance, where the parameter β > 0 governs how fast the probability decays with distance. The second function points out that the value of a successful innovation is increasing in distance, but with diminishing returns. The parameter η ∈ (0 , 1) defines how strongly the innovation payoff responds to distance. From the FOC, we derive the following expression for the optimal distance that the R&D firm decides to target: 

d∗ = ηβ [mϕακ(1 − α)1−κ]. (5) Second order conditions confirm that d∗ is indeed a maximum. 

⋄ Proposition 1: An increase in AI productivity m pushes research firms towards more distant recombinations (i.e. more radical innovations); while an increase in the fraction 

α of tasks performed by AI has a non-monotonic effect, pushing towards more distant recombinations first, and closer recombinations (more incremental innovations) later. As noted above, the parameter κ moderates this relationship, as it defines the threshold at which the lack of complementarity between AI and human researchers, and hence the lack of novelty and creativity in the R&D process, kicks in and starts to reduce the optimal target distance. 

# 3 Extension: A Quality-Ladder Model 

In this section, we extend the previous model to a vertical innovation framework. We now consider p(dt, λ AI ) to be the Poisson arrival rate of innovation for a single research firm at time t which, as before, depends negatively on recombinant distance. As in Aghion et al. 9(1998) each period corresponds to the arrival of a new innovation. The successful innovator gets a temporary monopoly on an upgraded vintage of the intermediate good, until displaced by the next innovator. Its quality, approximated by the stock of knowledge At, jumps to a higher level, with the magnitude of the jump dependent on the recombinant distance: 

At+1 = At(1 + γ(dt)) .

As noted earlier, a recombinant innovation is not only valuable for the innovating firm that introduces it, but also for all other R&D firms, because it creates new opportunities for further recombinations in the future via imitation and knowledge spillovers. In terms of the knowledge network representation noted above, when two distant ideas are combined, a new intermediate node is added, creating many new shorter paths to link previously existing distant ideas and thus, increasing the probability of developing new combinatorial innova-tions in the future. This idea is in line with the literature on General Purpose Technologies (GPTs), in which a breakthrough radical innovation fosters the later introduction of a wave of incremental innovations (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995; Venturini, 2022). We model this GPT-effect by introducing a scaling factor ψ(d) > 1 that increases the future aggre-gate arrival rate of innovations, and that positively depends on the optimal distance in the previous period: 

ψt = exp( θd t−1),

with θ ∈ (0 , 1). In the R&D sector, there are N homogenous firms, all targeting the same optimal distance. Therefore, the aggregate arrival rate of innovations, rescaled by the factor ψt, is given by: Λtψt = Ntp(dt, λ AI )ψt.

Let πt+1 be the monopoly profit. Arrival next period is given by Λ t+1 ψt+1 and depends therefore on dt via the GPT-effect. The asset equation that describes the value of becoming monopolist Vt+1 may be expressed as: 

rV t+1 = πt+1 − Λt+1 ψt+1 Vt+1 , (6) where r is the inter-temporal rate of preference. Solving for Vt+1 gives: 

Vt+1 = πt+1 

r + Nt+1 p(dt+1 , λ AI )ψt+1 

. (7) We will define πt+1 below. 

Final Good Sector. There is a single final good produced according to the production function: 

Yt = Atxϵt ,

where xt is the amount of intermediate good that final goods firms purchase from R&D companies, and ϵ ∈ (0 , 1). Since the final good market is competitive, final good producers take the intermediate good price as given and demand it up to the point where its price equals its marginal product. This yields the inverse demand function: 

pt = ϵA txϵ−1 

> t

.

Optimal Target Distance. The latest innovator becomes monopolist of the updated version of the intermediate good, which is produced one-to-one with labor. The innovator 10 determines the optimal quantity of intermediate good to supply by maximizing its profit 

πt = ptxt − wt:

x∗ 

> t

=

ϵ2At

wt

 11−ϵ

, (8) with optimal profit given by: 

π∗ 

> t

= A 11−ϵ 

> t

(1 − ϵ)ϵ 1+ ϵ 

> 1−ϵ

w− ϵ 

> 1−ϵ
> t

≡ A 11−ϵ 

> t

¯π(wt). (9) Substituting the expression of p(dt, λ AI ), At+1 , πt+1 , ψt+1 and γ(dt) into eq. (7), the R&D firm’s objective may be rewritten as: max 

> dt

e   

> −βλAI dt
> 

A 11−ϵ 

> t

(1 + dηt ) 11−ϵ ¯π(wt)

r + Nt+1 p(dt+1 , λ AI )eθd t − C(wt, μ t).

The FOC gives: 

ηd η−1

> t

(1 − ϵ)(1 + dηt ) − βλAI 

= Λt+1 θe θd t

r + Λ t+1 eθd t . (10) Using a Taylor approximation for small distances ( dt ≪ 1) 1, we obtain the following expres-sion for the optimal target distance: 

d∗ 

> t

≈ η

1 − ϵ

1 

> βλAI

+ Λt+1 θr+Λ t+1 

! 11−η

. (11) The direct effects of AI on optimal distance are the same as in the baseline model: higher AI power facilitates more distant recombinations. However, the quality-ladder framework introduces an additional, countervailing force. The aggregate replacement rate Λ t+1 , which depends on both the number of competing firms Nt+1 and the probability that each succeeds, appears in the denominator of the optimal distance expression. When Λ t+1 is high, either because there are many competitors or because competitors target shorter (and therefore more likely to succeed) recombinations, the expected duration of the innovation monopoly shrinks. This reduces the expected reward from distant recombinations and pushes R&D firms toward shorter and safer targets. 

Labor Market Clearing. Based on the research minimization problem (3), labor employed by a single R&D firm at time t is: 

lt =



mwt

μt

α

1 − α

−α

,

and the overall labor employed in the R&D sector is: 

LR,t = Ntlt.

Since intermediate good is produced one-to-one with labor, labor market clearing is given by: ¯L = LR,t + x∗ 

> t

, (12)  

> 1We can rescale the network’s distances so to work with small-dapproximation.

11 with ¯L being the total labor supply in the economy, which for simplicity we assume to be fixed. 

Free Entry Condition. Since there are no barriers to entry, R&D firms enter the market as long as the expected value of innovation exceeds the cost of a recombination attempt. In equilibrium, entry continues until the zero-profit condition holds: 

p(dt, λ AI ) πt+1 

r + Nt+1 p(dt+1 , λ AI )ψt+1 

= C(wt, μ ). (13) That is, the last entrant is just indifferent between entering and staying out of the R&D market. Further, we also make the following assumption: 

• Assumption 1: Entry is profitable when there are not yet research firms in the economy. When no other R&D firms are active ( N = 0), the expected payoff from entering the research sector exceeds the recombination cost. This ensures that innovation is profitable under the most favorable competitive conditions (permanent monopoly with no threat of displacement). Formally, this requires p(d, λ AI) · π/ (r) > C (w, μ ) evaluated at the optimal distance when 

N = 0. This is a necessary condition for the R&D sector to exist in equilibrium; without it, the cost of recombination would deter all entry and the economy would produce no innovations. This assumption is satisfied when, for instance, AI productivity is sufficiently high, the intermediate good market is sufficiently large, or recombination costs are sufficiently low. 

# 4 Equilibrium and Model’s Analysis 

## 4.1 Balanced Growth Path Equilibrium 

The Balanced Growth Path (BGP) equilibrium is obtained by solving the system of equations given by the free entry condition (13) and the optimal distance equation (10). Along the BGP, the stock of knowledge grows at constant rate gA, and so does the economy; the number of R&D firms is constant; and the allocation of resources and relative prices do not change over time. We consider a symmetric equilibrium where R&D firms target the same optimal distance d∗ in every period. To keep the model tractable, we make the following additional assumptions. 

• Assumption 2: Labor employed in research is a small fraction of total labor available: 

N l t ≪ xt, ∀t

Assumption 2 means that the research sector is small relative to the production sector in terms of labor absorption. Its main analytical role is to simplify the determination of wages: since most labor is employed in manufacturing the intermediate good, the equilibrium wage is determined by the intermediate sector alone (equation (14)), without needing to account for how research labor demand feeds back into the wage. This is a tractability assumption rather than an empirical claim. It would be most plausible in economies where the share of the workforce engaged in R&D is small relative to manufacturing, which is a reasonable approximation for many countries. Relaxing this assumption would require solving for the wage as a general equilibrium object jointly determined by both sectors, 12 significantly complicating the analysis without, we conjecture, altering the qualitative results. Under assumption 2, wage is determined only by the intermediate sector as: 

wt = ¯Lϵ−1ϵ2At. (14) Along the BGP, the wage rate grows proportionally to the knowledge stock, wt ∝ At.

• Assumption 3: The GPT-effect on the probability to innovate is stronger than the reduction due to distance, i.e. θ > βλAI .Assumption 3 states that when a firm achieves a successful distant recombination, the result-ing increase in future innovation opportunities (through new shorter paths in the knowledge space) more than compensates for the difficulty of the original combination. In network terms, bridging two distant ideas creates a new intermediate node that connects to many existing ideas via shorter paths, generating a wave of follow-up incremental innovations that outweighs the low probability of the initial bridge. This is consistent with the empirical evidence on General Purpose Technologies, where a single breakthrough (such as the tran-sistor or the internet) typically triggers a sustained cascade of complementary innovations. Formally, this condition is sufficient (though not necessary) for the optimal distance d∗ to be a well-defined maximum of the firm’s objective function. When it is violated, meaning that distant recombinations do not generate enough follow-up opportunities, the firm’s prob-lem may have no interior optimum, and the model would predict that firms always prefer the shortest possible recombination distance. Notably, this condition becomes easier to sat-isfy as AI power increases: stronger AI not only facilitates distant recombinations directly, but it also makes it more likely that those recombinations generate sufficient subsequent opportunities. Under the small distances approximation and considering leading terms only, we can rewrite the optimal distance equation and free entry condition as: 

d∗ ≈

"

η

1 − ϵ

1 

> βλAI

+ N θ r+N

# 11−η

, (15) 

A 11−ϵ 

> t

(1 + dη) 11−ϵ ¯π(w)

r + N = C(wt, μ t). (16) 

⋄ Proposition 2: If assumptions 1-3 hold and we follow a small distances approxima-tion, a BGP defined by equations (15) and (16) exists and it is unique. 

Proof. Let us denote the right-hand side of eq. (15) with R(N ) which is a continuous and decreasing function 2 in the number of research firms N . Substitute for ¯ π(w) and C(wt, μ t)in the free-entry equation (16); as innovations arrive in the economy, both the wage rate and AI price increase ( wt, μ t ∝ At) and therefore the cost scales linearly with At (C(wt, μ ) ∝ At). Since ¯ π(wt) ∝ A− ϵ 

> 1−ϵ
> t

, both sides of free entry scales linearly with knowledge stock and N is indeed constant. Let us define E(d) ≡ Ξ(1+ dη ) 11−ϵ 

> Γ( α,m )

− r, with Ξ = (1 − ϵ)ϵ 1+ ϵ 

> 1−ϵ

ι− ϵ 

> 1−ϵ

, ι = ¯Lϵ−1ϵ2

and Γ( α, m ) = α−α(1 − α)−(1 −α)ι1−α ¯μα 

> mα

. We see that E(d) is continuous function, increasing in d. Assumption 1 ensures that E(0) > 0. Finally, we define the following map: Φ( N ) = E(R(N )) − N      

> 2d(0) =
> η
> 1−ϵ
> 1
> βλAI
> 11−η
> and d(∞) =
> η
> 1−ϵ
> 1
> βλAI +θ
> 11−η
> .

13 Since Φ is continuous, Φ(0) > 0 and Φ( ∞) < 0, by the intermediate value theorem there exists a value of N such that Φ( N ) = 0 and therefore, a BGP equilibrium exists. Further, because of the strict monotonicity of E(d) and R(N ), such equilibrium is unique. The existence of a BGP relies on an important assumption: the price of AI μt and the stock of knowledge At grow at the same rate over time. The fact that AI price will increase over time is a reasonable assumption to make considering current trends where more powerful AI models require more data, larger infrastructures, more energy and greater staff expenditure (Cottier et al., 2024; Lohn and Musser, 2022). On the other hand, however, according to the GPT literature, the new AI-based GPT may be expected to improve over time progressively leading to lower prices to final users (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005; Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). Decreasing AI prices in the future could be the natural result of the technological trajectory, or the consequence of the public provision (or support) of AI because of its societal importance and welfare effects. In this case, our proportionality assumption between μt and At would not hold, ruling out the possibility of a BGP. For this reason, for completeness, we compare the BGP with two alternative scenarios, decreasing 

μt and fast-growing μt, and analyze our model using the true FOC eq. (10) and free-entry condition eq. (13). Since our system is non-linear, we proceed via numerical simulations. The results are shown in Fig. 2. In the decreasing μt case, R&D costs fall over time pushing a greater number of firms to enter the market. A higher number of firms increase the overall arrival of innovations, short-ening the duration of monopolies with consequent reduction in the optimal target distance. Hence, the growth rate of the knowledge stock (and of the economy) is lower than in the BGP case. By contrast, the case of a fast-growing μt leads to the opposite pattern: increas-ing research costs deter firms from entering the market, thus lowering the overall innovation arrival. Longer monopolies act as an incentive for firms to target greater distances in the knowledge space, resulting in an increasing growth rate of the knowledge stock. Therefore, this simulation exercise confirms the importance of property rights and monopoly power for growth rates, a result that is in line with seminal models of Aghion and Howitt (1992); Aghion et al. (1998), with the only difference that here our functional forms prevent growth from falling to zero 3.In summary, the BGP equilibrium is defined by the following system of equations: 

(F1(N, d ; α, m ) = N − E(d; α, m ) = 0 (FE) 

F2(N, d ; α, m ) = d − R(N ; α, m ) = 0 (DC) The Jacobian matrix is: 

J =

 1 −Ed

−RN 1



,   

> 3It is interesting to note that Aghion et al. (2017) present, in the appendix of their work, a Schumpeterian model with AI where innovations are developed in a two-stage process. The economy goes through cycles, each made up of two phases. Every time a GPT arrives, the economy enters in the first phase in which all labor is devoted to research in order to discover a new intermediate good adopting this latest GPT. When such intermediate is discovered, the economy enters the second stage, where labor is now devoted to its manufacturing until the new GPT arrives. Aghion et al. (2017) discuss the extreme case in which automation in the production of ideas increases the arrival rate of GPTs up to infinity, leading the economy’s growth rate to zero. Again, our simulation gives similar conclusions with the exception that even with extremely high aggregate arrival of innovations, d∗= 0 is never an optimal strategy from eq. 10 and therefore, the growth rate of knowledge never goes to zero.

14 and the determinant is det( J) = 1 − EdRN > 1.    

> (a) Knowledge stock growth rate
> (b) Optimal distance
> (c) Number of firms

Figure 2: Simulation of the quality ladder model with true FOC and free-entry condition (no Taylor approximation). Blue curves for the AI price increasing proportionally to the stock of knowledge At; green dashed curves for AI price increasing more than proportionally than At and orange dotted curves for AI price decreasing over time. 15 4.2 Comparative Statics 

Having established that a unique balanced growth path exists, we now study how this equi-librium responds to changes in AI parameters. Specifically, we study how the equilibrium values of optimal recombination distance d∗ and the number of research firms N shift when AI productivity m or the fraction of automated tasks α increases. We apply the Implicit Function Theorem to the system defined by equations (FE) and (DC) above, treating ( d∗, N )as endogenous variables determined jointly by the optimal distance and free entry conditions. Table 1 presents a summary of the comparative statics results discussed below. 

4.2.1 Increase in AI productivity, ∆ m > 0. 

dd dm = 11 − EdRN

(Rm + RN Em)An increase in AI productivity m lowers recombinant cost Γ( α, m ) and therefore encourage entry of new research firms in the economy ( Em > 0). This has two opposite effects on optimal recombinant distance: on the one hand, the optimal distance rises because of the facilitated recombination due to higher AI power ( Rm > 0); on the other hand, though, distance falls because of the higher number of firms and the consequent shortened expected monopoly duration ( RN < 0). The overall change in d∗ is therefore ambiguous and it de-pends on the magnitude of these direct ( Rm) and indirect ( RN Em) effects. 

dN dm = 11 − EdRN

(Em + EdRm)The effect of an increase in AI productivity on the number of firms N is unambiguously positive. Indeed, the direct effect ( Em > 0) is positive since the reduction in costs spurs entry into the R&D sector. The indirect effect is also positive, since optimal distance is pushed up ( Rm > 0) increasing monopoly profits ( Ed > 0). 

4.2.2 Increase in the share of AI tasks, ∆ α > 0

dd dα = 11 − EdRN

(Rα + RN Eα)The term Rα = ∂d ∗ 

> ∂λ AI
> ∂λ AI
> ∂α

∝ (κ − α) captures the direct effect of α on distance and α < κ ⇒

Rα > 0; while RN = ∂d ∗ 

> ∂N

< 0 measures how the number of research firms affects the optimal distance d∗ (more firms imply shorter d∗); finally, the term Eα = ∂E ∂α denotes the effect of α

on the expected returns, with a threshold defined by: 

αc = ¯μ

¯μ + mι 

for α < α c, Eα < 0 and viceversa. Let us consider the case κ > 0.5. This means that the negative effects of AI (due to an excessive use of AI in research, which leads to duplication effects and lack of creativity) kicks in after a considerable share of tasks is assigned to AI. Let us point out three distinct cases: 1. Low α: α < min( αc, κ ). Both direct ( Rα) and indirect ( RN Eα) effects are positive. At the same time, entry is discouraged because of lower net expected payoff (due to 16 a rise in Γ( α, m )), and fewer firms target longer recombination distances. The overall effect is dd dα > 0. 2. Intermediate α: min( αc, κ ) < α < max( αc, κ ). Direct and indirect effects have opposite signs. The overall outcome depends on the relative magnitude of the AI effect and the free-entry adjustment. 3. High α: α > max( αc, κ ). Both direct ( Rα < 0) and indirect ( RN Eα < 0) effects are negative. The duplication effect due to an excessive use of AI in research shortens optimal distance, it reduces costs and incentivizes entry, thus reinforcing the negative effect on optimal distance. Hence, dd ∗ 

> dα

< 0. 

dN dα = 11 − EdRN

(Eα + EdRα)We now shift the focus to the effect of an increase in the share of AI tasks on the number of firms N . The term Ed = ∂E ∂d > 0 measures how recombination distance affects expected returns. The sign analysis of Eα and Rα remains unchanged. Let us point out three regions: 1. Low α < min( αc, κ ): the direct effect on optimal distance is positive and so it is the indirect effect, but the direct effect on entry is negative ( Eα < 0). Hence, the overall net effect depends on the relative magnitudes of these two effects. 2. Intermediate α: we distinguish two sub-cases: a. αc < κ : an increase in α fosters entry ( Eα > 0) and it increases AI power, allowing more distant recombinations ( Rα > 0). The overall effect on the number of firms is positive. b. αc > κ : a further increase in α decreases AI power and optimal distance because of duplication of research effect ( Rα < 0); and it also discourages entry Eα < 0(via an increase in Γ( α, m )). The overall effect on N is negative. 3. High α > max( αc, κ ): an increase in α fosters entry ( Eα > 0), but the effect on dis-tance is negative because of high duplication and lack of novelty in research ( Rα < 0). Again, the overall net effect is ambiguous. In summary, the analysis above shows that for lower levels of automation optimal distance increases at first, and it then decreases for higher level of AI usage. In other words, when AI use in research is low, an increase in the fraction of automated tasks would increase optimal distance, favoring more novel and radical recombinations. Once a high level of automation is reached, however, further reliance on AI would produce duplicate research with focus on already well established fields, effectively lowering AI power in research. Therefore, firms would find it rational to target shorter distance recombinations, which will lead to incremental innovation and a lower rate of growth of the knowledge stock in the economy. Fig. 3 shows the results of simulation analysis of the BGP equilibrium of our model, using the true equations for distance optimal choice and free entry (without the Taylor approximation). The simulation analysis confirms the results noted above: when varying α,recombinant distance increases until the duplication effect dominates, while an increase in AI productivity always increases d∗.17 Table 1: Summary of comparative statics along the balanced growth path 

Panel A: Increase in AI productivity ( ∆m > 0)

Variable Sign Mechanisms 

dd ∗

dm Ambiguous Direct effect ( Rm > 0): higher AI power facilitates distant recombina-tions. Indirect effect ( RN Em < 0): lower costs attract entrants, raising creative destruction and shortening monopoly duration. Net sign de-pends on which effect dominates. 

dN dm + Unambiguously positive. Lower re-combination costs encourage entry (direct), and greater optimal dis-tance raises monopoly profits, fur-ther attracting firms (indirect). 

Panel B: Increase in AI task share ( ∆α > 0)

Region Condition dd ∗

dα dN dα Mechanisms Low α α < min( αc, κ ) + Ambiguous AI–human complementarity is strong. Both direct and in-direct effects push d∗ up. En-try effect ambiguous: higher distance raises profits but cost effect discourages entry. Intermediate α min( αc, κ ) < α Ambiguous See note † Transition zone. Direct and indirect effects 

< max( αc, κ ) on d∗ have opposite signs; net outcome depends on relative magnitudes. High α α > max( αc, κ ) − Ambiguous Streetlight and stepping-on-toes effects dominate. Both direct and indirect effects push d∗ down. Entry effect ambiguous: lower costs favor entry but reduced distance lowers profits.                             

> Notes: The table reports the signs of the comparative statics for optimal recombination distance d∗and the number of research firms Nwith respect to AI productivity mand the fraction of AI-automated tasks α.The threshold αc= ¯ μ/ (¯ μ+mι ) determines when the cost effect of αon expected returns changes sign. The parameter κgoverns AI–human complementarity and determines when the duplication effects (streetlight and stepping-on-toes) begin to reduce effective AI power λAI .
> †In the intermediate region, dN/dα > 0 if αc< κ (entry is encouraged while AI power is still rising) and
> dN/dα < 0 if αc> κ (duplication is already reducing AI power and discouraging entry).

18 (a) Comparative statics with respect to α  

> (b) Comparative statics with respect to m

Figure 3: Comparative statics with respect to the fraction of tasks AI is applied to α and AI productivity m.19 5 Conclusions 

Knowledge advances through the recombination of previously existing ideas, in a process akin to the cross-pollination of seeds that produces new cultivated varieties (Weitzman, 1998). The increasing integration of AI into R&D activities provides researchers with pow-erful tools to navigate the broad space of possible idea combinations, identify promising candidates, generate hypotheses and accelerate experimentation. Yet, the impact of AI on the direction of innovation, whether it steers research toward radical breakthroughs or incremental refinements, remains a central open question. In this paper, we have addressed this question by developing a model of recombinant innovation embedded in a Schumpeterian quality-ladder framework. In our model, ideas are located in a knowledge space where distances capture the cognitive dissimilarity between fields. R&D firms choose how far to reach across this space, facing a fundamental trade-off: distant recombinations are riskier but lead to more radical and profitable innovations, while close recombinations are easier to develop but generate only incremental advances. AI enters this trade-off in two ways. On the one hand, it increases the probability that a given recombination succeeds, effectively reducing the distance between ideas and enabling more ambitious research strategies. On the other hand, AI also provides competitors with the same opportunities, raising the aggregate rate of creative destruction and shortening the expected duration of innovation monopolies. Our analysis points out three main results. First, an increase in AI productivity has an ambiguous effect on optimal recombination distance: the direct facilitation of distant recombinations is counteracted by intensified competition, and the net outcome depends on which of these two forces dominates, with the direct effect prevailing when AI capabilities are still moderate. Second, and most strikingly, the effect of increasing the fraction of research tasks performed by AI is non-monotonic: at low levels of automation, expanding AI usage encourages more radical recombinations, but beyond a threshold, an excessive reliance on AI reduces effective research power due to the streetlight and stepping-on-toes effects, which lead to duplication of research, and hence push firms back toward incremental innovation. Third, in the limiting case of full automation, in which human researchers are absent from the R&D process, optimal recombination distance collapses to zero and knowledge growth ceases, as AI-driven research loses the creative diversity that human involvement provides. These results contribute to the recent modelling literature on AI and economic growth by embedding the recombination problem into a quality-ladder framework, a channel that is absent from recent models of AI and R&D, such as Gans (2025a,b). In our setting, AI does not merely affect the innovating firm’s own research capability; it simultaneously alters the competitive environment by empowering all firms, thereby accelerating the rate at which monopoly positions are displaced. This tension between individual benefits and aggregate displacement produces richer and more complex comparative statics that would not emerge in a framework without strategic interaction. Beyond the modelling contribution, our findings have broader implications for innova-tion policy and the governance of AI in research. The non-monotonic relationship between AI adoption and research novelty suggests that there may exist an optimal degree of AI integration in R&D, which may exploit AI’s capacity to bridge distant knowledge domains without sacrificing the creative diversity that human researchers provide. Policies that pro-mote AI adoption in research should therefore carefully monitor and assess the risks of over-automation, which, according to our model, would lead to a duplication of effort in scientific and R&D research, and hence a slowdown in knowledge creation. This finding is 20 in line with recent empirical evidence showing that the benefits of AI in scientific discovery are heterogeneous and depend critically on the judgment capabilities of human researchers (Toner-Rodgers, 2024) and on the novelty level of the research target (Lou and Wu, 2021; Tranchero, 2024). Furthermore, the role of monopoly duration in shaping firms’ research di-rection has implications for intellectual property policy: our simulations suggest that regimes providing stronger and longer-lasting protection for innovators may encourage more radical recombinations, whereas environments with rapid displacement favor incrementalism. In an era where AI is accelerating the pace of innovation, the design of patent systems and the regulation of AI-assisted research necessitate careful reconsideration. Our analysis has limitations that point to relevant directions for future research. First, the model treats AI as an exogenous input with a given price trajectory, without modelling the strategic behavior of AI providers. At present, the market for AI tools is quite concentrated, and the pricing, quality and accessibility of AI depend on the decisions of a small number of firms. Endogenizing AI provision, for instance, by introducing a monopolist or oligopolistic AI sector that sets prices and invests in capability improvements, would allow for a richer analysis of how the structure of the AI market affects the direction of innovation. Gans (2025a) has shown that monopolistic AI provision can have unexpected welfare benefits by restricting adoption; our framework could be extended to explore similar questions in the context of recombinant innovation and creative destruction. Second, our model has introduced a graph-based representation of the knowledge space. We have used this representation simply as a general structure to frame the model, and we have only focused on pairwise distances between ideas to provide a conceptual foundation to the analysis of recombinant innovation. However, our analysis has not exploited the full network topology, including clustering, density variation and the emergence of new nodes through successful recombinations. Future extensions of this model could study how the structure of the knowledge graph influences the type of innovation that is developed: for instance, dense regions of the network where scientific understanding is already well-established may benefit most from long-distance recombinations that open entirely new research trajectories (knowledge expansion), while sparse, newly emerging areas may benefit more from incremental, short-distance combinations that consolidate and deepen existing knowledge (knowledge deepening). Furthermore, the graph representation opens promising avenues for empirical operationalization. For instance, knowledge distances can be measured using patent citation networks (Chen, 2017), semantic similarity of scientific publications (Gentzkow et al., 2019), or co-occurrence patterns in research output. Dynamic network analysis may be used to track how the topology of the knowledge space evolves as new recombinations add nodes and create new paths, providing testable predictions about the relationship between AI adoption, network structure and the rate and direction of innovation. 21 References 

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1992). A model of growth through creative destruction. Econo-metrica , 60(2):323–351. Aghion, P., Howitt, P., Brant-Collett, M., and Garc´ ıa-Pe˜ nalosa, C. (1998). Endogenous Growth Theory . MIT Press. Aghion, P., Jones, B. F., and Jones, C. I. (2017). Artificial intelligence and economic growth. Technical Report 23928, National Bureau of Economic Research. Agrawal, A., McHale, J., and Oettl, A. (2023). Superhuman science: How artificial intelli-gence may impact innovation. Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 33(5):1473–1517. Agrawal, A., McHale, J., and Oettl, A. (2024). Artificial intelligence and scientific discovery: A model of prioritized search. Research Policy , 53(5):104989. Almeida, D., Naud´ e, W., and Sequeira, T. (2024). Artificial intelligence and the discovery of new ideas: Is an economic growth explosion imminent? Besiroglu, T., Emery-Xu, N., and Thompson, N. (2024). Economic impacts of ai-augmented r&d. Research Policy , 53(7):105037. Bianchini, S., M¨ uller, M., and Pelletier, P. (2022). Artificial intelligence in science: An emerging general method of invention. Research Policy , 51(10):104604. Bonaventura, F., Colombo, L., and Miluzio, M. (2022). Houston, Abbiamo un Problema: Storie Astronomiche di Fallimenti di Successo e Altre Sorprese . Rizzoli. Bresnahan, T. F. and Trajtenberg, M. (1995). General purpose technologies: Engines of growth? Journal of Econometrics , 65(1):83–108. Chen, L. (2017). Do patent citations indicate knowledge linkage? the evidence from text similarities between patents and their citations. Journal of Informetrics , 11(1):63–79. Cottier, B., Rahman, R., Fattorini, L., Maslej, N., Besiroglu, T., and Owen, D. (2024). The rising costs of training frontier AI models. arXiv preprint .Gans, J. S. (2025a). Growth in ai knowledge. Technical Report w33907, National Bureau of Economic Research. Gans, J. S. (2025b). A quest for ai knowledge. Technical Report w33566, National Bureau of Economic Research. Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., and Taddy, M. (2019). Text as data. Journal of Economic Litera-ture , 57(3):535–574. Jones, B. (2025). Artificial intelligence in research and development. Technical Report 34312, National Bureau of Economic Research. Jovanovic, B. and Rousseau, P. L. (2005). General purpose technologies. Working Paper 11093, National Bureau of Economic Research. 22 Lohn, A. and Musser, M. (2022). AI and compute: How much longer can computing power drive artificial intelligence progress. Lou, B. and Wu, L. (2021). AI on drugs: Can artificial intelligence accelerate drug develop-ment? evidence from bio-pharma firms. MIS Quarterly , 45(3):1451–1482. Sharma, B. G., Agrawal, S., Sharma, M., Bisen, D. P., and Sharma, R. (2011). Econophysics: A brief review of historical development, present status and future trends. Toner-Rodgers, A. (2024). Artificial intelligence, scientific discovery, and product innovation. 

arXiv preprint .Tranchero, M. (2024). Finding diamonds in the rough: Data-driven opportunities and phar-maceutical innovation. In Academy of Management Proceedings , volume 2024, page 13751. Tranchero, M., Brenninkmeijer, C. F., Murugan, A., and Nagaraj, A. (2024). Theorizing with large language models. Technical Report 33033, National Bureau of Economic Research. Venturini, F. (2022). Intelligent technologies and productivity spillovers: Evidence from the fourth industrial revolution. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 194:220–243. Wang, H., Fu, T., Du, Y., Gao, W., Huang, K., Liu, Z., Chandak, P., Liu, S., Van Katwyk, P., Deac, A., and Anandkumar, A. (2023). Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature , 620(7972):47–60. Weitzman, M. L. (1998). Recombinant growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 113(2):331– 360. 23